But if women fight back will violence escalate? It’s hard to generalize but a doctor writing in the Medical News tells a story which shows that effective self-defence can reduced violence. He prescribed self-defence for battered women who came to him for tranquillizers. Far from escalating domestic violence, the ‘bewildered’ husbands never bashed their wives again.SR.55, February 1977
11	STATEIdeas about a woman’s place in the world are not merely outdated prejudices and fancies lurking in the minds of individuals. They are enshrined in Acts of Parliament, the actions of local government, in welfare legislation and they are enforced through the courts, the police, the army. Women’s domestic and subordinate role in the family is clearly assigned by the mass of systems that make up the state.The development of the British welfare state shows this clearly. National Insurance benefits (for which all who work pay) and Supplementary Benefit, the safety-net system for those whose needs are not met by a wage, accrue to the man as head of the family. A married woman cannot claim supplementary benefit in her own right since she is expected to be supported by her husband. Where there is no ‘proper’ family the woman is penalized by benefit geared to subsistence level and by humiliating pressures, as in the case of Carol Geddings, reported in Spare Rib No. 73, who was divorced from her husband and had her benefit cut off ‘because her husband was visiting the house - because he had legal access to the children!’ The cohabitation rule assumes that a woman who has a sexual relationship with a man is his financial dependant and is therefore not allowed benefit.This state of affairs is not static and has been challenged repeatedly throughout the seventies. The state branches into so many areas which affect women, either through public financing or through the law, that women have come into political confrontation with its processes. Some confrontations have been a direct result of the women’s movement, like the refuges which establish a centre for women in the community and point to the lack of adequate protection for women under the law. Some engage women as consumers, such as the protests over withdrawing free school milk, or in direct action, as in the housing movement in which unsupported mothers or women living in collectives squat empty houses. Women have been especially involved in the mushrooming of Claimants’ Unions, since three out of five claimants are women. Women social workers have helped to pinpoint the inconsistency of state policy which views the family as ‘natural’ and eternal and, at the same time, needing to be fostered and encouraged to stop it disintegrating. They have questioned their own role in obscuring the stop-gap role of welfare where, in Jo Bock’s words, ‘Living conditions, financial and employment problems were regarded as excuses rather than explanations for “problem” families’ (an early SR).In other countries where the patriarchal family holds sway through religious institutions which are more intertwined in government and the state judiciary, feminist campaigns have often centred on sexuality or rights in matrimony. The Italian divorce referendum in 1974 raised the whole question of the structure of the state and its links with the power of the Church. An act to legalize abortion brought 50,000 women marching through Rome in 1976, while the Catholic Church threatened to excommunicate anyone from social worker to doctor who helped in an abortion after it was legalized in 1978. Public demonstration has often been crucial, as in the case of Maria Benito in Spain, who was saved from five years jail and a £450 fine for adultery (SR.54). By 1978 adultery had moved out of the Spanish criminal law bracket and into civil law, along with women’s right to divorce, contraception and abortion, thus loosening the feudal hold of men over women which had been legally entrenched in the Franto regime and upheld by the religion moral code.In liberation wars, either against an imperialist power or a repressive national government, women’s militance is often inspired by their role in the family. In Chile, women relatives of ‘disappeared’ prisoners formed an alliance after 1974 and, in this case, with the help of the Catholic Church, focused protest against the military dictatorship. Similarly the patchwork protest pictures made by women in the shanty towns around Santiago illustrate the vitality of kinship and community in sustaining political resistance. Women have been in the forefront in movements arising out of civil rights, as in Ireland or the Black movement in the United State in the sixties, yet their political role is often trivialized. National liberation movements have also intensified conflict over women’s traditional role. In Spare Rib No. 66 Rosemary Sayigh described how the Palestinian concepts of male honour and the protection of women were challenged by young women ‘undertaking direct political action, leading in some cases to imprisonment, torture, rape and death’. 
Netherley UnitedMARIA O’REILLYThe government has just spent four years and two million pounds on a report which ‘reveals’ that inner areas of Liverpool are poverty-stricken and deprived, and that the slum clearance programmes of the past were ‘a brutal uprooting of people and communities’. Defensively, councillors call for a Dunkirk spirit - and continue to cut back on housing. Only thirty-seven new council houses were built in Liverpool in 1976, though there are thousands homeless.Netherley, a huge council estate on the southern edge of Liverpool, was part of those slum clearance programmes. 22,000 people live there, half in flats, half in houses. ‘It’s Colditz or the concrete jungle,’ says Dot, a flat-dweller. ‘It is. I don’t know how they could put people in here to live. The woman who designed them is supposed to have got a medal. I bet she wouldn’t live in them rent free.’The design is bad, the building, the drainage. So there’s a high incidence of diarrhoea and dysentery on the estate, and mental-illness figures are very high, especially among housewives and mothers. This sub-standard property is let to what the council consider sub-standard people - the homeless, social services cases, people with no bargaining power. At least half of the men are unemployed. There are many single mothers and twice the city norm of pre-school children - with very few facilities for them.... I suppose it would only be fair to start off by describing myself in some loose terms.I’m a housewife with three kids. I’m twenty-eight and live with my husband. I’m also tall, thin, part-time barmaid, with the sort of teeth a dentist would be sued for insuring. I’m basically optimistic, a terrible gabber. Oh and I’m a woman, making a valiant attempt to write this article forty-four times. I’ve decided before I give up totally I’ll try questioning and answering myself, with fingers crossed. I hope I don’t develop schizophrenia because the odd valium I take won’t cure that. Here goes:When did you first get involved in tenants’ work, Maria O’Reilly?Well, it all started in 1973 after a near fatal accident in the block of flats where I live.These flats are an overspill development - huge uniform lines of flats and houses, a concrete city, city being a poor word really because it implies some kind of facilities. But facilities here are non-existent. It wasn’t till two years after the first houses were opened that any shops were built - there was only a mobile one. And you still have to go 1 ½ miles by bus to do any real shopping. In most cases the accommodation is unsuitable. The landings are draughty, offering little opportunity for socializing. The overall emotion here is usually isolation and despair, closely followed by apathy.After I’d lived in the flats for a few months it became obvious that the council’s policy was one of total indifference. Lifts are constantly broken down. Structural defects are apparent. The leaking roofs for example make your home life intolerable.Christine Roche, SR.28, October 1974Much of our community come from slum clearance areas, friendly communities where people had their own front doors, with more space for the kids to play out. Life in the flats for those with kids was totally alien and the kids’ response to their environment is graffiti and vandalism.All the feelings of discontent came to a head in the demonstrations which followed the child’s accident. An ambitious toddler had climbed the three foot six balcony to have a peck at the world below, but leant too far out. The housing department were reluctant to rehouse his family, reluctant to set a precedent, a precedent in humanity. It was only because we demonstrated and began to organize ourselves, that anything happened.I got involved because I wondered how many would be interested in improving things by forming an Action Group, instead of grumbling in groups on the way to the shops or the rent office. The response was encouraging - over 100 came to the first meetings, over 300 of us blocked off the toads. We wanted to organize around housing allocations, repairs and the general conditions on the estate. The system by which people are allocated new housing had not been reviewed for ten years. It’s assessed on points - supposedly based on living circumstances - not on individual needs. One way of getting out of the Netherley flats is to have a medical certificate. But as a doctor here said, you need to have no legs and no head to get a house in Netherley if you’re a flat-dweller!But how were we to get the City Council to take notice of our demands? We decided on a demonstration to the town hall with the total conviction in our hearts that the Lord Mayor would sort out the City Housing Department for us (he left by the back door when he heard we were in the foyer!). We presented a petition to his secretary who very efficiently steered us to the door. We then decided to march to the Housing Office. It was teeming down and we all got soaked.Next we took over the Housing Information Office and refused to leave. The best aspect of the whole thing was that all the mothers and kids who were down there that day were in the same boat, all wanting to be rehoused... but their main concern was for the woman whose kid had been hurt. They wanted her and her kids to get rehoused. It was a tremendous show of human concern, considering the difficulties all these mothers had and the premium on rehousing.We managed to get a list of our complaints to the District Housing Manager, trusting him to deal with them. We heard nothing. So we decided to block the main road in Netherley. This was a strategic move as it is the main road to Widness and very busy at peak hours. It was a frightening step to take. We realized we would upset a lot of motorists, besides - and most seriously - the local police. Ironically they turned into our most lenient allies. They dealt with us with an expertise lacking in the housing department, and asked what our demands were. By now I’d realized it was best to climb to the top of the ladder, though harder. We asked for a meeting with the Director of Housing. With the help of the police this was promptly arranged.Two of us were chosen to represent our case to him, but we also needed an official name. We called ourselves the Netherley Flatdwellers Action Group. We set off apprehensively for our destination. The office was impressive enough. There were eight of them and three of us, including the mother of the child who was injured. I had to take my baby with me and they were quire considerate, even giving her some milk for her bottle.What they thought of us I don’t know. I secretly quaked in my shoes. But we were convinced we had right on our side. A local newspaper had printed a satirical article I had written about the flats, which helped us a lot since it was an obvious embarrassment to the housing officials. When we’d presented our case, a list of complaints and a threat to occupy the office until the mother was transferred, they relented. She was given a place, and an agreement was made that officers from the different departments concerned would walk around the estate to check our more general complaints about conditions. This was progress. We had shown we were concerned about our environment and were beginning to get organized. We were determined that our protests should result in concrete benefits for everyone on the estate.They then set up a Liaison Committee with various officials and ourselves on it. Attending these meetings was a trial in itself since they were on their ground - in the city hall with its endless meeting rooms, all huge and intimidating. To me it was another world. Armed only with a Woollies notebook, a list of complaints, packets of cigarettes and a brazenness begotten by fear, I confronted the officers as the meeting progressed, feeling an undercurrent of hostility from them. After over a year of attending these meetings I realized why. To them I was an unpolished opponent, totally ignorant of procedure, with no knowledge of building, planning and allocation, a council tenant and most of all a woman amongst a group of men. What a cheek I appeared to have telling them where they had gone wrong. They with their huge salaries and diplomas and years of ‘experience’, some having worked the whole of my lifetime in their particular field. No wonder they were patronizing and refused to understand any points I made. And they didn’t like it when I told them the only way they could understand just how bad Netherley was would be by living there themselves.We made some progress and won some small victories. Next we wanted to change the allocations procedure, and decided to prepare the case on behalf of all flat-dwellers with families, not just those in Netherley. So we went round conducting surveys, collecting cuttings from newspapers. I read all I could get my hands on about housing. Finally, in 1975, we prepared a report and sent a copy to our MP with the hope that the Minister of Housing might read it.(In November 1976 the council did eventually pass new allocations proposals though they don’t go far enough - they won’t help people in ground-floor flats [like myself] or one-parent families. We’ve drafted our own suggestions for ‘points’ - we say people who spend two years in the flats should be automatically rehoused.)Meanwhile things had begun to move. The council agreed to move out families with three children and those with children of opposite sexes, because they need more bedrooms. We felt elated, but it wasn’t enough - any child is in danger in the flats. Slowly the decanting began, but at present it’s virtually at a standstill because of the cuts. Also the city council have decided to build all new council houses for sale not for rent, and this is a city where there’s not enough housing to go round as it is.The past years of fighting round housing have been fascinating. I have faced male chauvinism I failed to see existed before. As a representative of the other women I always tried to present our case forcefully. The councillors had their salaries to rely on; I only had the other women’s trust. Sometimes our faith failed us. Four years is a long time when progress is slow. An opponent once said to me, ‘You never give up do you?’ Well we haven’t, though we’re not naive enough to think that the fight is over. We’ve been offered a tenants’ co-operative which we think is a form of buck-passing. We wouldn’t be allowed to use the rents for house building and would inherit the mess of bad planning. In fact we’d just be unpaid rent collectors and eviction squads for all the real managing of the estate we’d be allowed to do.One of the difficulties, and one of the strengths, of our campaign is that we are nearly all women with kids. Taking the kids on demos and to meetings was a drawback when you never knew how long you’d be out. We tried to get round this by organizing babysitting rotas. This wasn’t really satisfactory because the women who had to mind the kids in their homes, no matter how earnestly they believed in the cause, were dampened in their enthusiasm by hordes of toddlers clambering all over the furniture. With no community centre at that time there was no alternative, and we also had to organize the meetings in our own homes. We never minded this as it gave more women with kids a chance to discuss their problems and come out of their isolation, drawing strength from one another. Some mothers were keen but didn’t think it was quite nice to go on demonstrations, so they helped with the propaganda work. You see, we didn’t have any money so it was hard to produce leaflets; so news of the time and place of meetings had to go by word of mouth.We did paste posters up by the lifts. They often got torn down. We thought the council employed special leaflet-tearer-downers! They certainly spied on us to see how many turned up to the meetings. ‘I’ve known our group to club together out of their own pockets to stop gas being turned off and people being evicted, sometimes out of their own rent money, getting into arrears themselves. We contacted all the major companies that directly affect our lives - electricity, gas - and we fought them all.We have met interesting people over these years, people we wouldn’t have met otherwise, people with strange ideals none of us were used to. We learned to accept people as they really were, not by what they had or whether they were dirty or poor. We came to understand politics, usually thought of as a man’s world, and expected more of ourselves-knew more about what we could and couldn’t do for ourselves. People now call us women’s libbers. I never realized but we must have become just that, though we’re not all aware of it. Of course some of the men around regard us suspiciously and think that we hold ritual bra-burning sessions to which we might invite their wives.Then there are the vultures, those who consider us a bit crackers, the ‘you’ll never get anywhere’ brigade, who sit back and reap the benefits of our efforts. There are those who don’t care for us and are rude about us until they have a problem themselves. We don’t care though, it’s nice to think that despite what they say they trust us enough to ask for our help when they need it. If we can give it we will, and we’re not resentful of the ‘vultures’.One of the things that became apparent over the years was the isolation people felt. They always compared their lives and homes to the old days, yearning after the old community. But why wouldn’t people do anything? Why all the apathy? It was obvious that without a fight things would get worse. We had managed to confront some of the council’s apathy and indifference, but you can’t demonstrate against your own kind.I sensed they felt Netherley didn’t really belong to them. True, it doesn’t, but while we live here we belong to it. You can’t expect people to fight for or demand something they don’t even feel exists. That’s why we organized the Carnival.What started out as an idea snowballed from a pathetic beginning to a week-long event involving thousands of people. Flat-dwellers, house-dwellers, people who’d been poles apart in understanding one another’s problems, mixed freely in one week of fun and activity. At the first meeting three of us stood for two hours waiting for someone else to turn up. We were just about to go when three girls came. That saved the Carnival.The idea caught on and soon the meetings were attracting sixty people at a time. Street committees were organized, street parties, day events. The estate was decorated like a May horse. One wholesaler said he’d never heard of Netherley until we started coming in for the crepe paper! On the parade that preceded the Carnival over 4,000 mums and dads, kids, grannies, aunties and uncles turned out in fancy dress. They were marching round the corner twenty deep and that’s when we realized we’d won. Every organization on the estate was involved. Schools, the community centre, the judo club. It must have been something people were waiting for and waiting to do or it wouldn’t have come off. We found organizers and people with skills they never knew they had. We couldn’t solve everyone’s problems, people with little or no money or whatever, but we hoped people would have a happy week, something to smoothe over their wounds, a week when they’d say bugger the problems, bugger the rent and spend it on themselves and the kids having a good time.After the Carnival a big lorry driver came into the pub for a pint. He didn’t know me but had seen something about me in the local paper. He simply said, ‘Well, when are we going to start organizing next year’ Carnival?’ Then I realized we had reached our goal. Unity. People had become Netherleyites. They had stopped saying ‘When are you going to...’I was at home the night the Carnival ended, exhausted, wondering if it had all been worth it. An old lady knocked on the door - you see her often on the estate, she’s always asking for ciggies; she and her husband look really down and out. What she said to me convinced me more than anything else that we’d succeeded. In stilted speech she asked me to thank all the people of Netherley for the lovely week they’d had. ‘Everyone has been so friendly and happy,’ she said, ‘and my husband says Netherley isn’t such a bad place to live after all.’SR.56, March 1977 
Dependence and a New Political ConsciousnessKATHERINE GIEVEIn spring tills year at the Oxford Women and Socialism Conference on the Demands of the Women’s Movement a new demand was put forward. It was proposed that we should demand an end to women’s position as dependent persons, and that this should be brought forward for adoption, at the national conference in Edinburgh at till end of June. A group of us in Oxford have been working on a paper for the conference and felt that people who couldn’t go to Edinburgh, or who are not actively involved in this movement, should know something of the proposal.A married woman is a dependant of her husband, much in the way his children are. This dependence is expressed in numerous different rules and regulations. It is one of the first principles of social welfare legislations, it affects pensions, taxes, student grants, unemployment, sickness, and supplement benefits; in terms of common practice though not of laws, it affects business negotiations such as H P and mortgages.Nor does it confine itself to married women, the principle is clearly shown in a rule which relate particularly to unmarried women: the cohabitation rule. When a woman lives with a man, they are treated as man and wife, and the woman loses her right to claim supplementary benefit as a single person. The man she lives with has an obligation to support her, she becomes a dependent person whether she likes it or not.The demand is not intended to be merely a legal one. We want to challenge the idea of dependence as well as the laws. For this reason we would like to group the campaigns together under one general demand rather than fighting separately on each question. The new demand would embody important ideas not expressed in the four demands as they stand. Though these demands are concerned with ways in which women can gain control over their lives, and so become independent, they do not directly attack the presumption of women as dependent persons, nor do they attack the crucial role of the state in creating and re-creating this dependence.Thus the new demand would represent an important long-term goal. From it would flow a variety of different campaigns centred around women’s immediate needs. There campaigns need by no means all involve parliamentary lobbying, but could be conducted in various       Posy Simmonds, SR.6, December 1972ways: women at work could fight for better pensions; discriminating business practice could be exposed in local areas; women could add their active support to the Claimants’ Union campaign against the cohabitation rule, perhaps by supporting individual women who are trying to make claims. These campaigns should appeal to diverse groups of women, and might have the advantage of introducing into the movement more women who are angry about particular practical questions.There will certainly be problems in making our demands. One general one emerged from our discussions: that of how to break the vicious circle of dependence. Women are treated as being dependent on men; because of this they do not seek equal pay, unemployment benefits, pensions, etc. It is therefore difficult for them to be independent, hence they need the benefits of their position - for example, the right of a woman to get support from her husband. We are faced with the question of how far we should try to preserve these benefits, or how far we can preserve them, while fighting dependency. This remains a problem even though many women do not benefit at the moment anyway. There does not seem to be a general solution, and we will have to work out the answers in the context of particular campaigns.It is clear that we will not succeed in changing the attitudes of men towards women, nor women to themselves, just by changing the laws. But the laws do contribute to maintaining women’s inferior position, and we hope that, by working to change them, women’s material conditions will be improved, and that the campaigns will give rise to a new political consciousness in thinking about the state and the family.SR 25, July 1974
Mice in ManchesterROSE ADES AND ELEANOR STEPHENSThe Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC) was set up in 1975 under the Sex Discrimination Act (S D A) as a testament to the Labour Party’s continuing concern about the position of women. Its overall brief was to abolish discrimination against women and to promote equality. For a kick off, the government gave them a budget of over a million pounds for the first year (which they didn’t manage to spend), three floors of a shiny new office block in Manchester and a staff of about a hundred seconded civil servants. They’re headed by fifteen commissioners appointed by the Home Secretary who meet once a month to make all policy decisions.While not expecting revolutionary action from a government body, and accepting its own definition of itself as a ‘middle-aged Establishment pressure group’, we did expect to see some results after a year and a half. The EOC does, after all, have formal powers of investigation backed up by legal sanctions, no shortage of things crying out to be investigated and, unlike women’s liberation groups, easy access to government and the power to a………nd legislation. Yet they’ve made very little impact: as one feminist, herself involved for years in bureaucratic struggles, put it, ‘They crept off like mice to Manchester and we’ve hardly heard a squeak out of them since.’ Why not?The Chairman (she insists on this title) is Betty Lockwood, appointed to the Commission in return for nearly thirty years of service to the Labour Party, the last eight a Chief Women’s Officer. Similarly experienced in party politics, and also a committee woman, is her deputy Lady Howe, married to the Shadow Chancellor. This political balancing act is unique among statutory bodies - maybe they’d have to change places under a Tory government! Certainly it’s a factor in the Commission’s obvious difficulties in reaching decisions, taking actions and making swift public statements on relevant issues. (Lockwood and Howe are the EOC’s only public voices.) Three of the commissioners are nominated by the T U C and three by the C B I. They tend to act as a block to maintain the status quo and guard their own territory of traditional bargaining. Do they see themselves as accountable to the bodies they represent or to the Commission? These roles often conflict and neither of the T U C women, Ethel Chipchase and Marie Patterson, are known to represent women except in a token way.The other ‘independent’ commissioners were chosen from the official civil service lists of The Great and The Good (these lists exist!) and they represent, among others, Education, Scotland, Wales and the Law. As far as we could discover none had been at all involved in pushing the anti-discrimination laws through or in any other women’s rights groups - though one had written speeches for Roy Jenkins, the then Home Secretary. Several women’s groups and agencies like the National Council of Civil Liberties (NCCL) had put forward well qualified feminist candidates but none were chosen, although similar bodies like the Consumer Council do have ‘interest groups’ represented on them. At the moment there is a vacancy to be filled, but there’s no way of finding out on what grounds the Home Office will make the appointment. Last week this question was asked in the House of Commons and the answer was a predictable example of parliamentary evasion.Among the commissioners only Caroline Woodroffe, head of Brook Advisory Centres, a family planning agency, has any obvious professional involvement with women and, from talking to her, some sympathetic awareness of their needs. On the whole they are competent professionals of the ‘I did it myself and so can you’ school. Two women involved in campaigning for the legislation told us: ‘It was such a shock when we saw who they’d appointed as commissioners. We knew then that the whole thing was going to be a farce. We had never really discussed the role of the Commission but we knew it could only be as good as the people on it. We needed people committed to women with the will to fight for changes.’So what has the EOC been doing? Despite their full co-operation we found this hard to discover: when we asked commissioners and staff members what they had been working on and what were their immediate priorities, we were nearly always referred back to the EOC’s strategic role (a phrase used again and again in press releases) and the importance of doing nothing which would jeopardize long-term strategy. What is this strategy? This, we were told, would have to wait upon their present efforts to discover the extent of the problem. As Betty Lockwood told us: ‘We haven’t yet defined what we’re going to have to look at.’ Were we being impatient or impertinent to expect more than this after a year and a half and a million pounds?The EOC has wide powers to investigate discrimination and promote equality. Under the S D A it has to work in three main areas: Goods, Facilities and Services; Employment; and Education. As well as making sure that everyone is aware of her rights and his obligations (!) it has a duty to see whether these laws are strong enough, to suggest improvement and to look at areas like taxation and social security not covered by the act.So what happens when evidence of discrimination is brought to the EOC’s attention? (In general it doesn’t go out to find it.) Believing that it’s basically in everyone’s interests not to discriminate against women, the EOC likes to use Softly Softly methods of persuasion. Betty Lockwood and most of the Commission seem genuinely to believe that no one really benefits from the exploitation of women - they only need to be shown that discrimination is bad for business or the labour movement, and then they’ll automatically shape up: ‘If we’re going to succeed in any area we’ve got to have the goodwill and co-operation of all who are involved; there’s no point our being involved in a head-on clash.’ This political viewpoint is at the root of their failure to recognize the vested interests involved in keeping things the way they are and that, to have any effect at all, they’ll have to take a much stronger stand. We looked at how they’ve approached the three main areas.Their preference for working behind the scenes with informal fix-it-up tactics (‘We have to see what the other chap’s afraid of,’ we were told) has had some success in consumer service areas like hire purchase and credit - particularly with trade associations and central management whose business depends on good public relations. But even if, after letters, phone calls or visits, Head Office agrees to co-operate, local branches are not obliged to stop discriminating unless someone takes them to the county court. So far only five cases have been brought under this section of the S D A and three of these are still waiting.The county-court system costs money and is so unwieldy that you’ll almost certainly have to stay angry about being refused a pint, or a cup of coffee after ten at night, for at least a year! But until a case is won no legal precedent can be set, so the EOC are keen to support women in bringing cases, especially since at the moment they won’t issue non-discrimination notices on their own initiative. Its attempts to persuade Local Authorities to stop discriminating against women on housing matters have been almost entirely ignored.In education the emphasis has also been on high-level consultation but it’s even harder here to see any concrete results. We do know they took the initiative in getting quotas abolished, like the Open University quotas, some of which had had the effect of positively discriminating in favour of women. As for the Tameside investigation into the selection of grammar school places, it’s generally agreed to be a complete red herring.Some interest was expressed in setting up a working party to examine sex stereotypes in school textbooks, but they’ve already made it clear that they wouldn’t dream of using any legal pressure to change it - ‘This would be censorship,’ said Eileen Byrne. They aren’t even planning to issue guidelines to publishers, but they have given a little money to Spare Rib and Virago to produce educational materials. Some staff members are very keen to see the EOC take action on day care and a working party has just been set up to look into this. We certainly hope they’ll make some headway, and not accept the Cuts as an excuse for government inaction.Everyone we spoke with admitted that the employment section has been fraught with difficulties - ‘A complete non-starter,’ said one staff member - and several new staff, including the head of department, have just begun work. Given the crucial importance of this area for women - ‘This is our main thrust,’ said Betty Lockwood - their almost total inactivity here beyond answering enquiries is pathetic. Not only have the Cuts and unemployment hit women hardest but the difference between men and women’s average hourly earnings has actually increased in the past two years.We were told by the legal officer, Jennifer Corcoran, who monitors all the tribunal results on equal pay, that ‘some companies have ten cases clocked up against them, but we were hesitant to recommend that the employment section responded to this as we felt it was more important that they should work out their own emphasis and areas to work on.’ This may be sensible in theory but in fact they still haven’t decided what these areas are. Until February 13 this year they hadn’t used their powers of formal investigation at all, and they only started to investigate Electrolux after a pep talk from the Home Secretary and a specific request from Justice Phillips, president of the Employment Appeals Tribunal. This investigation is still in progress and they have no idea when it will be completed.Legally the EOC can conduct a formal investigation wherever discrimination is suspected (it’s hard to think of anywhere this would be inappropriate!) and if this results in issuing a non-discrimination notice with legal sanctions, the offender(s) have to change their ways whatever the cost or they can go to prison. This would give us something comparable to America’s very powerful ‘class action suit’ whereby a group can take a case - though with British laws, we still couldn’t get such huge sums in compensation. So what stops the EOC using this, their most powerful weapon? Apart from their fear of combat and terror of making themselves unpopular, they treat formal investigations as mammoth two-year projects only to be used with extreme caution as a last resort. There’s no reason why this should be: given that things are getting worse all the time for women, investigations should be swift and sharp. It’s not essential to have a complete dossier, with every extenuating circumstance, before issuing a non-discrimination notice. If the EOC was known to move quickly, this could make them a force to be reckoned with, rather than weakening their behind-the-scenes bargaining position as they fear.As it is, their main achievement has been to post a letter to 500 employers asking them about their policies and practices for promoting equal opportunities. No one has to answer it (several companies have told them to get lost) and they are not going to be investigated further. There is no way for the EOC to know whether the versions they receive from the employers tally with what the workers would say, if asked, unless someone happens to make a complaint or goes on strike for equal pay! In fact the EOC sent one of these November letters to the Laird Portch company in East Kilbride, where the women have recently come out on strike for Equal Pay. There are plans to use the answers to these letters as the basis for their long-awaited guidelines of best employment practices. Unlike the statutory code they originally planned, it has no legal force but can be more outspoken. As the EOC has so far taken little initiative itself in the area of employment, everything depends upon cases being brought to tribunals by individuals with the help of their unions, the NCCL or the EOC.Betty Lockwood has tried to influence the composition of the industrial tribunals and offered training for their members, but the Chairman of the Council of Industrial Tribunals has turned her down: after all Equal Pay cases are only 6 per cent of the total. But it’s extraordinary that the EOC has made no public statements criticizing these decisions, and remained silent over the five-month Trico strike. It’s very fortunate for women that Justice Phillips, head of the Appeals Tribunals and an expert in Inland Revenue law, has chosen to base his judgements on the spirit of the law. So the appeals results are a great improvement.The Commission does claim considerable influence at government level, which lies beyond the scope of most women’s groups. They’ve submitted evidence to the Department of Education on student grants, and recently to the Royal Commission on Distribution of wealth, showing both how women suffer economically from their dual role and the hidden poverty of married women. They also sent a deputation to the Chancellor attacking the sexist basis of personal taxation.Two reports have just been published evaluating the Manpower Services Commission (M S C) and the Job Creation Programmes. Since the 16-19 age group is one of the EOC’s stated priority target area, we expected to see signs of their influence here. Betty Lockwood told us: ‘We have a considerable influence in the M S C and quite frankly I would like to establish a real power base there.’ The House and Commons Expenditure Committee report showed that three quarters of the jobs go to boys, with girls still channelled into traditional slots like typing and laundry work. It pointed out that some of this can be explained by the fact that the Area Organizers, nominated by the TUC and CBI, comprise two women and sixty-five men. It deplores the discriminatory practices of these schemes and makes proposals for improving them. If the M S C is an area of EOC influence, perhaps the time has come to start using this influence.Their role in influencing government and exerting pressure from the top down was often emphasized as the main reason for their lack of militancy, their desire not to be identified with ‘irresponsible elements’ and their fear of being partisan. (‘We might gladden the hearts of thousands of women, but this could lead to a backlash,’ we were told.) So far, there’s little evidence that this sacrifice has been worthwhile.While the EOC’s existence has had some consciousness-raising effect on women’s expectations and is an acknowledgement of the extent of the discrimination that needs to be tackled, it had no publicity campaign in 1976. Because of confusion over its desired public image, its first Press Officer, Sandra Oliver, who lasted six months, wasn’t allowed to spend any of her budget. Finally in February this year there was a one-day national press campaign costing £56,000 to advertise some of the smiling faces at the EOC. They now agree that this wasn’t the right emphasis, and that subsequent campaigns will have a wider perspective. We’re not quite sure what this will be: ‘The Commission has accepted at a recent meeting that the image that the Commission wishes to project will change from time to time. Sometimes it will be low profile, sometimes a persuasive one and sometimes a much sharper one,’ was Betty Lockwood’s statement when we asked her about this.Obviously the EOC’s most effective publicity comes from what it does and its own public statements. While it issues frequent and lengthy press releases, usually based on speeches by Lockwood and Howe, these are rarely taken up because they’re not newsworthy. (On two issues where the EOC’s voice might have had some impact - Child Benefits and the Benyon Bill - they said nothing.) The Press Officer’s job is not a happy one.Many of the problems and criticisms we’ve raised have been put down to teething problems and of course some are to be expected in any organization. But despite all the talk of new initiatives and improved working relationships between staff and commissioners, there’s little evidence of any real change in attitude or a greater understanding of the power struggle involved. It’s true that some of the staff are increasingly committed to what they’re trying to do but this only adds to their frustration when so much of their ideas and work is ignored or blocked at the top.Even more depressing, the EOC may actually be doing more harm than good. Without the courage and the will to battle for changes, it takes the heat off other institutions and serves to keep people quiet and things as they are. We certainly hope that now its teething problems are over things will change dramatically. Otherwise its real problem can only be the fear of showing any teeth at all.SR.60, July 1977       Christine Roche, SR.86, September 1979
In on the ActJILL NICHOLLS AND RUTH WALLSGROVEAn appeal tribunal has said that cases of dismissal for pregnancy cannot be heard under the Sex Discrimination Act - because there is no possible comparison with a man. They ruled that Kim Turley was not dismissed from Allders Department Store because she was a woman, but because she was pregnant! She had no case under the Employment Protection Act either, because she’d been working there less than a year.On the other hand, a contract excluding illnesses connected with pregnancy from provision for sick pay has been found unlawful under the Equal Pay Act.Three women clerical workers at Sim-Chem Ltd are appealing to the House of Lords about a job evaluation scheme. They are claiming that they should get equal pay backdated to the day when their jobs were rated equivalent to men’s. At the time of the evaluation, there was a voluntary - not statutory - pay policy in Britain, and the company did not implement the scheme because the necessary salary increases would have been in breach of the pay code... Even more pathetic than their excuse is that the lower courts have ruled that the women are not entitled to back pay.Lord Denning has ruled that it is not unlawful for a company to select women’s jobs for redundancy if it can show that it is in those jobs that work is diminishing. But of course service and unskilled jobs are usually thought to be less ‘important’ than skilled or heavy manual jobs which, not by accident, are seen as men’s work.The Equal Opportunities Commission has won its first case against advertising that discriminates against women. Trago Mills had placed eight unlawful ads in West Country newspapers. They were trying to claim exemption from the Act because their staff have the legal status of being ‘self-employed’. Another ridiculous excuse. (N B Only the EOC can take discriminatory advertisers to court.)June Quinn has lost her case under the SDA against a Williams Furniture store. They refused her credit facilities unless her husband acted as a guarantor - even though they told her that her husband would not have needed a guarantor if he’d applied for credit. A county court judge ruled that she was discriminated against not because she was a woman, but because she had a low-paid job. Pretty much the same difference! Her appeal will be important as this could be a large loophole in the Act.The EOC backed all these cases.SR 96, July 1980
Pay Figures FallJILL NICHOLLSWomen’s pay is falling again in relation to men’s, and we are suffering more from unemployment, say the Equal Opportunities Commission’s fourth annual report, a much stroppier document than they usually produce.This growth of unemployment amongst women, combined with the dramatic increase in the rate of inflation has, in our view, contributed to a growing sense of uncertainty and insecurity among women. Taken together with the view, increasingly openly expressed, that the place of women is in the home, this has had the effect at once of encouraging an inclination to shelve equal opportunities policies as a luxury the nation cannot afford, and to increase the sense of frustration and resentment amongst many women.The report also complains of the demoralizing effect on people of having an EOC ‘set up to promote the principle of non-discrimination when other government policies appear to run contrary to that principle’ - referring in particular to government proposals on immigration and maternity leave.The widening gap between men’s and women’s earnings in the last year indicates, they say, the failure of the Equal Pay Act. The situation won’t improve until the Sex Discrimination Act is forcefully implemented. They criticize the constraints of the EPA, ‘which insists on the existence of a definite male comparison, does not allow comparisons of equal value in the absence of job evaluation schemes, and does not recognize the concept of indirect discrimination’.They also acknowledge that the EPA is useless for women ‘segregated in jobs traditionally performed by women and where there are no men engaged on like work… There is no remedy in the EPA for complaint from highly qualified secretaries seeking to compare themselves with more highly paid but unqualified clerical staff.’SR.98, September 1980 
NEWSHORTS EDITORIAL JILL NICHOLLSAll out worst nightmares of what a Tory government could mean seem to be coming true. Even we had not foreseen that the Tories would cut social services spending so far that they look likely to become the party to kill off many old people- providing no help or meals for the homebound, and fewer places in homes. They’re considering cutting pocket money for old people in homes and slackening the fire regulations. They want to close hostels for the mentally handicapped, hand hospitals over to voluntary organizations, charge for the use of public libraries... the government is cutting £300 million nationally this year. For 1980-81 the cut is 7 ½ per cent.And how much worse it is to know that a woman is presiding over the carnage. As we predicted, women are bearing the brunt of the cuts: It is we who have to stay at home to care for the elderly and disabled, we who have to give up work when nurseries close, or if the school-day is shortened. The Tories are even considering cutting our right to maternity leave, not because it costs very much (last year’s budget was underspent by 50 per cent) but because filling jobs on a temporary basis is inconvenient to employers. Perhaps what they are really saying is that women shouldn’t expect to be able to have children and jobs. The proposed abortion-law changes fit neatly into this scheme too.SR.86, September 1979
Harassment at HeathrowJILL NICHOLLS, ANGELA PHILLIPS AND RUTH WALLSGROVEThe outcry over the case of the Indian schoolteacher who arrived at Heathrow as the fiancee of a man living here and was subjected to a ‘virginity test’ by immigration officials, has forced the Home Secretary to ban such tests in future. It is not clear though how the government intends to enforce such a ban, as they claim not even to have known that the tests were going on. They must either admit that the immigration service is out of their control or accept responsibility for it.... It’s quite outrageous that anyone should have to go through a medical examination to see if she’s lying - in this case pretending to be a fiancee not a wife. And of course you can’t prove virginity by sticking a finger up a vagina - not every woman has a hymen. And even if you could, not being a virgin does not mean you are married. The whole disgusting exercise is an extreme stage in the humiliation and harassment of Black immigrants - like the equally pointless X-ray tests on children to ‘prove’ whether they’re telling the truth about their age. This woman says she was stripped, refused a dressing gown and examined internally by a male doctor, though she asked to see a woman. She was frightened that if she made a fuss she would be sent back. ‘I have been feeling very bad mentally ever since,’ she says. ‘I was very embarrassed and upset. I had never had a gynaecological examination before.’A female fiancee has a legal right to come to Britain without an entry certificate - she gets a three-month visa and if she marries in that time she gets permission to stay permanently. But wives wanting to join husbands here have to go through an extremely lengthy clearance procedure in their country of origin. Given the racist assumption that the worst thing that could happen to Britain is for one more Black person to get in than absolutely necessary, it becomes natural, as the J C W I say, ‘for an immigration officer to strive to ensure that all his errors consist in excluding genuine claimants and not in admitting spurious ones - and to be prepared to go to any lengths to attempt to detect the latter’.SR.78, January 1979
Immigration Tests in BritainJILL NICHOLLS, ANGELA PHILLIPS AND RUTH WALLSGROVEThe uproar over the harassment and humiliation of Black immigrants may be dying down in the press, but Black people’s organizations are determined to keep the protests going.The Asian women’s group A W A Z (which means ‘voice’ in Hindi) organized a demonstration at Heathrow airport on 10 February, calling for a public inquiry into the workings of the immigration service: ‘But there’d be no point in another Select Committee behind closed doors. What is needed is something completely open to the public, so that people can understand the meaning of these outrages.’ It is not just a question of winning concessions - getting virginity tests or X-ray tests banned - though these would be important steps. The demonstration also demanded that the ministers and immigration officers responsible be made accountable for their actions, and asked whether the Labour government condoned the present police-state situation where people have to show their passports to get medical treatment, to claim welfare benefits, even to send their children to school...SR.81, April 1979
One Wins, One LosesPAT FITZSIMONS AND KATH MCKAYThe daily newspapers reported the decision on 30 July to allow Nasira Begum, an Asian woman threatened with deportation because her British husband deserted her, to remain in this country. They failed to report another case being announced on the same day by the adjudicator which did not have such a happy ending. Anwar Dina, a British ­ born Asian woman, was refused permission to bring her three children from Pakistan to join her here.Anwar and her husband entered Britain under the wrong procedure, though both were legally allowed to enter. The Home Office had never previously raised the issue of their entry and does not dispute their right to stay. In his decision, the adjudicator took these irregularities as the sole reason for disbelieving that the children are Anwar’s, despite the substantial evidence put before him that they are hers.Sushuma Lal, Anwar’s solicitor at the Manchester Law Centre (which also handled Nasira’s case) believes the authorities did not think it wise to refuse both applications, and so chose to allow Nasira to stay as it would have been more difficult to deport her than it is to refuse Anwar’s children entry. Sushuma believes the two cases were purposely juxtaposed to soften the blow: Anwar’s decision was held up an unusual two and a half months until Nasira’s was heard.Anwar’s only recourse is to take an appeal to a tribunal, if she is given leave to do so. But as Sushuma says, that would entail convincing three people instead of just one, and they are all of the same ‘persuasion’.SR.98, September 1980 
InsideMAUREEN REYNOLDS INTERVIEWED BY ROZSIKA PARKERMaureen Reynolds was seem to prison for violence. Only 3 per cent of all ‘serious offences’ committed by women over a year involve violence against others. Like the vast majority, Maureen’s ‘crime’ was unpremeditated and committed in the home under extreme emotional pressure. She should never have been sent to prison. Neither should all the other women prisoners whose ‘offences’ are reactions to the female role, or ways of dealing with the demands of being a woman in the face of poverty, poor housing and ill health. Most women are sentenced for petty theft (shop lifting to feed and clothe a family), prostitution, or receiving stolen goods (helping and supporting a husband or lover).Maureen was a battered wife, but in 1968 when she was sentenced, battered wives were still hidden behind their front doors. Would she receive the same sentence today now that the context of her ‘crime’ is public knowledge? Would she be sentenced at all?Prison is destructive. Many women find it impossible to cope with the shock of institutional life. Others adapt all too easily, and with their feelings of dependency and inadequacy drastically increased, they become hopelessly institutionalized and incapable of surviving outside.Prison is supposed to ‘encourage them [the inmates] to lead a good and useful life’. Maureen was sent to prison because she once expressed the violence that, until then, she had turned against herself. Yet as the Radical Alternatives to Prison Group points out, ‘the very act of shutting people up in a closed institution creates more violence.’ Maureen’s story speaks for itself.I was charged with wounding with intent, but there wasn’t any intent. It was completely out of my control I just reacted immediately to the situation. That’s what used to bug me in there, thinking about it - I could so easily have been doing life.My husband was very violent - I was battered stupid for ten years. It got to the stage where there was nowhere I could run to because the police got fed up with me, and my husband would come and smash the windows wherever I stayed - my mother got sick of having her windows smashed. It went on and on and on. I tried to commit suicide twice. Then one day they sent me home from work because I was ill. All I wanted to do was lie down, I went upstairs, walked into the room and he was with this chick on the bed. I didn’t have anything against the girl, she was just the latest in a long line, but I went... and I just picked up... I didn’t even know if it was him or her... it all seemed to be coming out.I was on £20 bail for three months, everybody told me that getting £20 bail meant that it wasn’t serious, the police said I wouldn’t go down because they knew I’d had a lot of aggravation with my husband. Still, I realized I needed a solicitor so I walked along the street near the law courts where there are a lot of solicitors and I went into the first one I came to. I only saw him twice in the three months, and I saw the barrister twenty minutes before I went into court.Normally if violence, which can attract high penalties, is involved in a case, a solicitor will arrange at least one conference between the barrister and the defendant. It will be particularly important when the defendant’s personal history is so relevant. Maureen was on legal aid and payments are not likely to encourage barristers and solicitors to do more work than they might be remunerated for.Yes, the first time I’d ever set eyes on the barrister was sitting outside the Assizes. I felt so alone and I was terrified. In those days there weren’t any women’s groups or anything like that, and none of my family were up, they didn’t even know about it - I didn’t want anyone in know.You go in and there they are, all in their gowns with the bloody judge sitting up there in his big wig. There was one woman on the jury, one. Thinking back, I realize I should have said this, should have done that, but they are throwing questions at you, and you’re in that witness box...There is a right of challenge that a barrister can use to have seven members of the jury changed, although they can be replaced only by other potential jurors who have been summoned for service at the same time. ‘An inexperienced defendant is at a disadvantage in court even if well educated and articulate, but for those who have little education, who are scared or nervous and unable to express themselves in the kind of language they believe is expected of them in court, the handicap can be crippling, particularly if they wish to deny the offence or plead mitigating circumstances’ (Susanne Dell, Silent In Court - a study of the legal representation of women who went to Holloway).I was the only witness for the defence, and the judge threw the police evidence out of court because it was contradictory. First of all this sergeant came on, and he was asked if I’d seemed upset when I was at the police station after it had happened. He replied that I’d been perfectly calm. Of course I’d been in a terrible state, crying and really sort of gone.And then this other policeman came in and he was terrified, you could see he was awed by the whole thing, he was only young. He was asked, ‘Was she crying? Was she upset?’ ‘Yes,’ he replied. The judge turned round to the jury and said, ‘I want you to ignore the police evidence, I’m not going to allow it.’ But what the sergeant said about me had already been pretty damaging. He claimed I’d said, ‘I did it ‘cos she was messing about with my old man.’ That’s just not something I’d say.We suggest Emergency Legal Advice Services attached to police stations and available night and day to people held in custody at the station. (This was recommended to the Widgery Committee on Legal Aid and rejected.) Advice centres attached to police stations have been shown to work on Holland. (RAP)In fact all I could say at the police station after it happened was ‘my little boy’, ‘my little boy’. Steve was at home on his own, I was worried he’d wake up and wouldn’t find me there in the morning ­ he’d been through so much. That’s all I kept going on about.In the court they wanted to discredit me as an honest witness. They wanted to bring up in court, in front of the jury, in the middle of the case, that I had had a previous conviction - one for selling drinks without a licence, and one for being involved in a theft which meant I’d received something when I was seventeen (a long time ago). So they sent out the jury while they debated this point, well the jury must have known that something was going on. The judge then decided to allow my previous convictions, and the prosecutor tore me to pieces, ‘How can a woman who has been involved in all this be an honest witness’- you know.On the last day of my trial the judge had me remanded in custody.Fewer remands in custody will also reduce the number of women and girls subsequently sentenced to prison as there is strong evidence from this country and America that apart from any- other considerations, the mere fact of being remanded in custody rather than on bail significantly affect (adversely) both the finding of guilt and the sentence. (RAP)I went all the way from Birmingham to Holloway for the night, and came back next morning shattered - and then back to Holloway again - I got three years. The judge had made a big statement a few days before about the rise in violence and the need for law and order. And anyone who came into his court... I only got that judge at the last minute, it was a switch, just pure luck (or bad luck).I was taken from Birmingham to Holloway and arrived at reception with quite a few other women. There you are put into a box, we call them horse boxes though they are not as big as horse boxes. They each contain a little seat and if you sit on it there’s about a foot between you and the door and the walls. You strip and put on a dressing gown; the only thing you are allowed to keep on is your wedding ring, if you’ve got one, and anything else that won’t come off. They couldn’t get my bracelets off me. Then you are taken to where they check your clothes in. They make you take the dressing gown off, weigh you and search you all in front of the screws and the prisoners who work in reception.I was numb, I couldn’t believe that it was happening to me. After you are convicted the change in people’s attitudes towards you is, well, extraordinary, and suddenly you have no control over anything - they are all in control of you.After you’ve had your clothes checked in you’re taken back to the boxes where you sit and wait for anything up to four hours to see the doctor. He says, ‘Had any serious diseases? Got anything wrong with you? Are you on drugs?’ And you say, ‘Yea, I’m on this or that’, and he writes it down and gives it to you as long as it’s not heroin or anything. Then you go to see the nurse, you take off your clothes again and she searches you for crabs, and you’re back in your box again till they take you to whatever room you’ve been assigned to.I was given a great bundle of blankets to carry with my clothes and everything I’d got. It was like nothing I had ever experienced. It was just like you see in the pictures, all those landings, you know - and the smell. There are all the bogs out on the landings, it’s what they call the recess, a row of sluices where you sling your slop - you know, you sling it out in the mornings.I went to get my jug of water, and that’s it- you’re just locked in. I couldn’t believe that, could you? I thought they must let you out again, for something, a class - but no, it wasn’t until 8.00 the next morning. I kept waiting all night. And you hear the voices, all calling to one another from window to window. They scream abuse at the male screws going round with dogs, patrolling the grounds. They must have been really thick, really thick skinned to take that, because I couldn’t take all that abuse. But I think they are thick skinned - they stop thinking of you as people. That’s the only way they could do it.The screaming. I couldn’t sleep for smashing windows. Every night women slash their arms in the windows, often because their best friend has been moved away from them or because they are awaiting trial and haven’t heard from anybody. The windows are often not mended and it’s right draughty. You stick your jumper in the holes.In the morning, on a security wing, first thing you do is empty your pot or bucket, get your water and have a wash. You try to get the tap first because the water is cold by the time the last woman gets there. Then you get your tin tray and your mug, and march downstairs to what they call the ‘ones’, the ‘twos’ and the ‘threes’ - all those landings then you get breakfast (sometimes porridge, sometimes cornflakes and occasionally an egg). You take it back upstairs to your cell. After breakfast you go straight to work.It’s the little things that get you down, like not being able to walk through a door and make a cup of tea. And their attitude towards you; you hear them talking about you as if you’re not there, ‘how to lock them in’, ‘how many have you got out’, etc. And the sound of the keys all the time, when I came out I really missed that, you know, because that’s what you’ve lived with. A lot of the screws, the older ones, have got something wrong with their hands, after all those years of having to pull it and turn it, they get arthritis. The keys are on their belts and when they are opening the door it looks as if they are attached to the door. And they sort of swing their keys as they go along. It’s weird because prison is their whole life too. After they lock you in, you see their eye at the spy hole. The screw on duty at night has no keys. To get them she has to go the centre and come back with another screw who has the keys after the day screws give them in. If it was a real emergency you’d be dead by the time they reached you.I lost my appeal, they refused my appeal, and took sixty days waiting time off me as well. It took me nine months before I realized what had happened to me, then I got really depressed. Before that - it is such a funny feeling to explain - it was like a dream really. I knew it was all happening but I just seemed to be going through all the motions and not being there. What did worry me was that for two weeks I didn’t know where Steve was, he was eleven at the time. Eventually I stood on the wing and just screamed for the welfare person. They are so overworked - they have to deal with the whole bloody prison.After six months I was sent to Askam Grange, an open prison which I could not stand. I think it was partly because you could just walk out -	the gate was wide open. I couldn’t stand the other women there either. Most of them are stars - first time in nick - they just sit around - they’re really sort of brainwashed. They are like robots sitting there knitting. A lot of them were middle-aged ladies, who had just done a post office book or a cheque. They were good ladies, just dying of shame at being in there. All the best prisoners are sent to Askam Grange, or prisoners who have been in a long time.What I really minded was that it was too far for my mother to bring my son to see me. You were allowed a monthly visit from your family and there was a welfare visit every three months when the authorities had to bring your child to see you.Today women in open prisons and stars are allowed fortnightly visits.I asked twice to go back to Holloway but they said no. I said, OK I’ll go myself, and I did. Two of us came out, but I didn’t want to stay out because I figured they’d get me in the end and anyway I could never go home and be with my Steve. We had a couple of days out, and then went and knocked on the gate at Holloway. They wouldn’t let us in. ‘Visiting time is over,’ he said. ‘Oh, well, please yourself,’ I said.I went up in front of what they call a V C- a visiting committee of magistrates - for escaping from Askam Grange. You are marched in, and stood in front of these lady magistrates with a screw on either side of you - up close to stop you attacking somebody.They called me by my number, 89745, Reynolds, have you anything to say - and it freaks you out the way they say that. I just said that I’d wanted to be in London so Steve could be brought to see me. ‘Right,’ they said, ‘twenty-eight days loss of privileges, twenty-eight days behind the door, twenty-eight days loss of remission and twenty-eight days loss of pay.’I couldn’t believe it. That was another twenty-eight days, on top of the six weeks they had taken off me on my appeal. It was the same sentence as someone who had been out for six months and had been caught by the police. I was fighting mad, certainly not numb any more.I was in solitary for a month.I think a lot of women get used to it, because it is usually the same women who go there, you know, the people who won’t co-operate. And sometimes it seems to me that the more they do to you the more you sort of fight. I found that, anyway, the more they came down on me. You only come out of your cell to go to the bog, and that is when everyone else is locked up, so you don’t have contact with anyone. You are in artificial light all the time- there is opaque glass in the window and a dim bulb. There is no heating and the ventilation is fixed. At first you are given no bedding, just a mattress with a strip cover and you put on a strip jacket which is made of thick cotton to prevent people tearing it and committing suicide, I suppose.…One day they told me I was going to Styal in Cheshire the next morning - I was fighting mad and told them that if they wanted me there they’d have to drag me.Well, they have got these two women who work on the hospital wing and walk around with white coats on, they are supposed to be for people who are troublesome. They are the ones who strip you naked and throw you in the padded cells. You know, if you are playing at not coming out of your cell or something. Anyway, they came for me next morning, and they got the men, and they just stuck something in me, I        Pat Arrowsmithdon’t know what it was but I was just like a zombie - all the way to Styal I didn’t know where I was.Women in Holloway are heavily tranquillized: valium, nuactil and largactil are the drugs most frequently used.I’ve seen people come in there just full of life, really full of life, and been sort of vegetables when they go out. I noticed it when I went to Styal and came back down to Holloway for my divorce. A girl who had been a real sort of rebel just a few months before, when I came back she was just sitting on the stairs. I couldn’t believe it. I was told she’d had ECT. It was unbelievable, it was like it wasn’t the same person.When I arrived at Styal I went in front of the board, it consists of the governor and the assistant governor, priest, welfare and somebody else. I was screaming and shouting, ‘I’m not fucking staying, I’ll get out of here.’ So then I was on escort which means that everywhere you go you’ve got a screw with you, even when you go to the bog.They put me in where they make the grey jumpers the men wear in prison. Those machines were going all day long and I just sat and stared into space. Some women love the job in the machine shop top line because you can get 90p a week instead of 30p, but you have to put up with the noise and the intensity. I was quite lucky because the screw was really nice, she was really beautiful, she shouldn’t have been there. She became quite concerned as I looked a bit of a mess; I was very pale and sort of half dead. So they put me on an outside working party where I was a bricky’s labourer - mixed cement and carried bricks.Styal is a security prison which used to be a children’s home, then a refugee camp. There are all these big red brick houses with names like Elizabeth Fry - that’s the long-term house. Styal has got the biggest turnover of staff of any prison because they hate it being bound by the pretty rules and regulations as much as the prisoners. For example you can lose three days’ remission for smoking in the wrong place.They had these patrols at night; they go round in stockinged feet with gloved keys to see who is in bed with anybody else. If they caught you out of bed you’d go straight down to Bleak House for the night ­ that’s the punishment block. Every night they would have a sort of swoop, and you know you would stand at the bars in your nightie looking down at some other poor soul being escorted down the block. Every little thing that happens is a talking point for days - ‘they are raiding Sarah Martin House tonight, oh, there’s so and so, and so and so.’They’d be put in solitary and go in front of the governor next day, and lose a week’s pay. You have 30p a week, and out of that you have to buy tobacco, shampoo, matches, letters. You are entitled to one free letter a week and you could buy one more out of your wages. It’s hard for a woman whose family is in Jamaica.... In Holloway women make bags - they’re called dollybags – to carry round their valuables like mascara and soap - because the cells are open during work hours and things get nicked. Toothpaste is considered valuable because you only get tooth powder in there.Each house at Styal had a different library day. It’s quite hard to get an exercise book, you have to say exactly what you want it for and why it’s necessary for you to have it. You are not supposed to use it for anything except study. You have to promise faithfully that you won’t write in it about yourself, or about your crime, or about the prison or about other prisoners. Then if you want to take it out with you, you have to give it to the governor a month before you go. I started to get books and things and read a lot. It kept me sane. A lot of women inside can’t read. For those who can’t read well they have these big books with huge print. They are like kids’ books which is ridiculous, just because people can’t read small print it doesn’t mean they want Mary-went down-the-road-to-get-mummy’s-shopping sort of books. The classes are terrible at Styal. It’s compulsory to go to two - it’s nearly all needlework, dressmaking and cooking.There are lots of prison lawyers, you know, people telling you what to do and how to go about this or that. In Styal I was in the long-term house where it was more or less a dog-cats-dog situation. People become very possessive about little things. If you’re doing a long time you are allowed to have your own tea cup, some had a whole fucking tea set. Some would kill you for their own tea cup and their footstool ­ you know, respectable-type ladies with their little possessions and their little rooms, they feel secure and can’t survive outside. A lot of the women I was with had been coming in all their lives. They started off when they were twenty, got nine months, and then got eighteen months. They were usually the people who did fraud – cheques - and ended up doing five or six years.You even get a sort of upper-class distinction thing where the long­term prisoners in for classy crimes sort of look down their noses on the bed and breakfast prisoners.It’s the privileges which divide the women because they are so dead scared of losing them. What they do is to make someone house leader who is meant to be responsible and to see that everything goes quietly at night. Divide and conquer. The only place where there’s any solidarity is on the punishment block.Still, you do make real friends because you go through so much together. I made one friend who I still see often. She helped me inside because she was into Buddhism and things like that, and I got interested. I gave her one of my bracelets - the ones they couldn’t get off me in Holloway. You aren’t allowed to give things away, and she got caught wearing it. She was given twenty-eight days behind the door (solitary) because she wouldn’t say who had given it to her. I owned up and got seven days.There are endless little rules like that. You are not allowed to have a photograph of yourself in there - in case you remember who you are, I suppose - but you can have a picture of your family. You are never allowed to take your tights off even if it’s boiling hot. And you’re not supposed to talk about the prison - of course you talk about nothing else. Even at the group therapy sessions you are not allowed to complain about the prison, so you complain about each other.Every so often magistrates come round and they say, ‘Have you got any complaints?’ But if you do complain there are all the repercussions after they’ve gone. You are hauled up in front of the governor. ‘Why did you complain? If you have anything to complain about, why didn’t you complain to me?’ Anyway, as a prisoner your word is nothing - nothing you say is ever believed. If you have got a complaint against a screw, you know before you go into the governor that you have got no chance at all.I always thought that prison would never affect me. I always said that I wouldn’t let it affect me when I came out. But you’ve had time to think in there, and I became much more tolerant of other women - you start to look for the reason behind people’s actions - but I also realized what people could do to other people, things I’d never have believed, and I ended up thoroughly disillusioned with so-called justice.Suddenly you are shoved outside when, for three years you haven’t had to think. You don’t make decisions there at all. Then you’re out and you’ve got to find somewhere to live, you’ve got to find a job, you’ve got to start taking care of your kid again who has become a little stranger - it’s really scary.So much seems to have changed and there is nobody you know any more. You’ve been through something they haven’t, that’s the thing; a lot of people can only relate to people who have been inside as well. Then there’s the fact that you are alone. You know I had a bad relationship with my husband, but at least it was a relationship. I did live with someone for all those years, and suddenly I was totally alone - while you are in there you are sort of safe and secure. I had my mother outside otherwise I don’t know what I would have done. It leaves a mark, obviously it does.SR.33, March 1975
Living with the Army in Your Front GardenMARY MCKAYFrom the press and television it is easy to get a bundle of glib ideas about the situation in Northern Ireland, which assume that it is much like any other part of the UK, and could be normal, peaceful and democratic if only the population weren’t stuck in religious fanaticisms of a bygone age: a sectarianism associated on the Catholic side with a romantic nationalism, harking back to generations of Irish heroes; and on the Protestant side with a backward-looking loyalty to British historical victories irrelevant to the days of the E E C.If only, the story goes, people in Northern Ireland would take up more modern ideas, the Protestants would have no real reason to keep rights from the Catholics, and the Catholics would happily get on with life in an integrated Northern Irish state and stop worrying about Irishness.According to this picture, the Catholics were quite justified in demanding civil rights in 1967. Britain sent the troops in to protect them from the bigoted Protestant refusal. But then the Catholics too became unreasonable: their demands went beyond civil rights to nationalism, so the troops had to move against them too.This popular view of the N. Ireland situation leaves people here in Britain feeling befuddled about why the war goes on, and what they are fighting about now. And most of all, people here do not see why the Catholics want so passionately to get Britain out. To many people here it looks as if the British army is left in the middle trying to keep the extremists apart, and aiming to bring back conditions in which ‘ordinary people’ can get on with their lives - their homes, jobs and families.But this bewilderment and impatience in Britain comes from an ignorance of what life in N. Ireland has been since long before 1967. The fact is that everyday life for Catholics in Ulster never has been the ‘ordinary life’ of an average English family of the last thirty years. The essential feature is not the peculiarly intense religious differences that persist there, but that ancient economic and social privileges are overlaid on this religious divide, and still exist. They penetrate every aspect of daily life, and it is this that has drawn whole communities of Catholic men, women and children into political activity.I understood the part played by women very much in the context of a whole community’s resistance on a street level to the grinding discrimination in their basic conditions of life.On a short visit you have to peer through the dramatic details of the war situation to catch hints of what the place is ‘normally’ like. Once I had got over the shock of the foot patrols among the prams and shopping, the iron-grilled shopwindows, the overhead helicopters, the kerbsides lined with petrol drums against car-bombs, the Union Jacks waving outside concrete-barricaded Protestant villages, the house high wall paintings of republican lilies - I became aware of the underlying poverty of N. Ireland: the railway stations, small, grey, bedraggled and dowdy; the narrow streets in the centre of town, and their meagre shops; the old cars, the tiny shoddy houses. N. Ireland is an underdeveloped region of the British Isles, economically drained, like Glasgow and the north-eastern counties of England.Without even considering sectarianism, N. Ireland is getting a bad deal. It has always had the highest unemployment, lowest wages, worst housing, crummiest schools, highest emigration. This affects the whole working class, not only the Catholics. The average wage in Ulster is 88.3 per cent of the British male average, 79.5 per cent of the female. Unemployment is usually twice as high. Over 19 per cent of inhabited houses are officially uninhabitable, as compared with 7 per cent over Britain as a whole.But Ulster differs from the other underdeveloped regions in one crucial way: in these conditions of all-round scarcity, one group had the power to monopolize what little there was. The Protestants had all the key posts in public and private industry and government, nationally and locally. They used this to give all the jobs, houses and social amenities to the Protestant working class. This has created in N. Ireland a working class divided into two layers: 60 per cent Protestant, with relative privileges, and 40 per cent Catholic, discriminated against in an apartheid type of situation, to the extent of living in fairly separate enclaves of the cities.This isn’t so hard to imagine: the same thing happens to Blacks in parts of Britain, and to immigrant workers from southern Europe who come to work in Switzerland, France and Germany, to do the worst and poorest paid jobs, with very much second-class civil rights.N. Ireland is special only because the hierarchy in the working class is so highly organized into a system of Protestant political power.Women in N. Ireland suffer from the general pattern of deprivation. Their conditions as women are even worse than in the rest of the UK. Thirty-six per cent work outside the home, and they are even more confined to traditional women’s work in textile and service industries. The main firms, like the cigarette makers Gallaghers, engineering works and shipyards, advertise specifically for boys. Women can’t be postmen, and only very recently bus conductresses. The Sex Discrimination Act does not apply at all in N. Ireland. The Equal Pay Act is so watered down as to be useless: there is a special clause for N. Ireland that allows employers to keep special grades for women’s work – in an area where women’s pay is on average £16.73 a week, compared with £36.37 for men.In recent years government-sponsored industry has been aimed at providing jobs for men rather than women. In 1972 it was claimed that 6,242 jobs were created for men, but only 622 for women.In industry as a whole, plant and conditions are out of date, particularly in the mills where women are concentrated. A woman from Newry told us that when her mother worked in the local mill only twenty years ago, the mill girls had to work in nineteenth-century conditions, standing barefoot in water. The mill horn had called the women to work from their factory-owned houses. Her mother had died giving birth to her ninth child. The daughter spent much of her life in England because the Catholics in Newry, an overwhelmingly Catholic town, could get factory work or no work. She went to London to work in an office.With such high overall unemployment, it isn’t a simple matter of women finding it even harder to get work. Where work is so tight you often find women taken on instead of men, because they can be paid less. This has been the pattern in some parts of industry in N. Ireland, especially in the linen factories in Derry.We met women in the Catholic ghettoes of Derry, the Bogside and the Creggan, who had work in the local shirt factories when their husbands had none. There’s a song with the lines:In the early morning the shirt factory hornCalls women from Creggan, the Moor and the Bog...This must have affected men and women’s feelings about each other. The song goes on:While the men on the dole played a mother’s role,Fed the children and then walked the dog…but a couple of women told us that the women normally did the wife’s job as well, to ‘compensate’ the men for their feeling of uselessness during all those years out of work. Often the women had no choice anyway: their husbands went away to England for work, for whole stretches of their married lives, sending home money and returning only for the holidays, so the women had to keep house as well as do paid work.These conditions foster the strength and independence you’d expect, but even so I’ve spoke with one woman whose husband, a long­ distance lorry driver in England, said she wasn’t to go out in the evening while he was away. (She did though.)In fact, on out first evening in Derry, she was one of a group of women friends who took us to a social club. Between the four of them they had thirty-five children, which was quite typical. With all these children, living in tiny two-up, two-down terraces, the women keep a closeness to one another that has been lost in most English housing estates today. We hadn’t time to find out many facts about how women informally help each other not what formal arrangements there were, like playgroups, but we had a glimpse.We turned up at the house where we stayed in the Creggan at about five in the afternoon. Maureen and a neighbour, Anne, were sipping tea and doing each other’s hair. As soon as we arrived, Maureen ran out for a couple of other women across the road, and soon there were seven or eight of us in Maureen’s sitting room, talking as evening fell. Children came in and out; all ages play together in the street, so they can look after each other a lot of the time. We parted only when the women went home to get tea and smarten up to meet again later to go out together to a club.These Catholic women were in their mid-thirties and upwards. Talking with them about contraception, we found they were reluctant to use it themselves - ‘It would seem wrong’- and anyway they loved all their children and would have liked more. But they wished the young girls luck. Mary, who was about fifty-five, said that the teenage girls dressed and acted like boys (Bay City Roller pants were the rage), and were very free and brave. Sometimes they were mistaken for boys and picked up by the army. But it was a great pity, she said, that they married so young, often well before twenty, and changed, settling for a life of kids and domestic cares, just as she had done.The Catholic ideology is not solely responsible. There are real material pressures to marry early. A boy and girl never have much privacy, living in large families. Marriage is the only chance to move out. There is even more severe overcrowding since the ‘troubles’ because many Catholic families have left unsafe areas and crowded into the ghettoes. The householder voting qualification has also made Protestant-controlled councils unwilling to build more houses for Catholics. This was one of the chief grievances in 1967 when the Civil Rights Movement began.There are other restrictions too. Law relating to women in N. Ireland is backward: the liberalization of the British divorce laws doesn’t apply there, and neither does the Abortion Act of 1967- it is almost impossible to get an abortion in N. Ireland.So although there is an obvious delight in the children, there are resentments too, often unvoiced. For the woman from Newry whose mother died in childbirth, time spent away in England has made it easier to say how she resents, even rejects, the church, for her mother’s early death.The Catholic church is bound into the life of the people and has an enormous influence on them, not least through running all the schools that Catholic children attend (all education is religious in N. Ireland, Catholic or Protestant). Church attendance is very high. The Catholic hierarchy of N. Ireland is known in the Catholic world as particularly orthodox and conservative on religious and moral matters.Maureen said that as a young girl she thought the clergy must always be right. Since the troubles she has thought more for herself and is less subservient to the priests, though this hasn’t affected her faith. She said that some of the young are much more critical of both the clergy and the faith than she is, and there have been instances of open hostility to the local church when the priests did not show enough solidarity with what militants were doing.These women spoke a lot about their closeness and courage since the troubles. This must be partly as a result of long years of police repression and intimidation. Such deliberate discrimination needs a back-up of force. This is provided by the Special Powers Act of 1922, which gives the government unlimited powers to proclaim an emergency ‘whereafter it can make whatever regulations it deems necessary’. The act has been used throughout the century to intern Catholics without trial.While the Catholic and Protestant people of N. Ireland to some extent share the burdens of unemployment and poverty, it is the Catholics who are the main victims of the police. The Royal Ulster Constabulary, an armed elite police force almost entirely Protestant, spread fear among the Catholics. They always had some excuse for harassment in a state whose laws make it an offence to interfere with the display of the Union Jack, while the police confiscate any other emblem ­ such as the Irish flag - if they think it could cause a breach of the peace.The R U C was backed up by a part-time volunteer force, also armed, the B Specials, who acted like an official Protestant sectarian gang for forty years. Their disbanding was one of the first things demanded, and won, by the Civil Rights Movement. The woman from Newry told me of her memories of her childhood there: the ‘big Special’, who might be a grocer or a builder by day, who would shove you around with his gun ask you where you came from, abuse you as a Fenian and tell you to get back to the ghetto where you belong. She remembered the time an armed Special came into a Catholic classroom to question a child about her parents’ activities.Out of this experience of life in Ulster the Catholtc opposition arose. The particular kind of protest meant that women became very active. This protest didn’t take the conventional channels of Parliament or the trade unions. Although union membership is quite high (54 per cent of working people), in general the trade union movement has avoided the political issues of sectarianism, and the Catholics have not been organized as an oppressed minority in the unions. Nor have they had economic leverage there, as the Ulster Workers’ Council strike of May 1974 showed - Protestants in key industries stopped work in protest against any possibility of ‘power-sharing’. Catholics have not been working inside the heavy industry, skilled trades and power stations where trade unionism is traditionally strongest and strikes can have most effect. The working lives of Catholics have been continuously fragmented and disorganized by unemployment, emigration, casual work and unskilled demoralizing jobs.In the local government and Parliamentary sphere Catholics have been effectively barred from influence. Council elections have always given a Protestant majority. At Stormont any efforts by Catholic MPs to change things were always frustrated by the unity of the Protestant majority against them. By the 1960s Catholic politics were at a low ebb: the parties representing the Catholics were demoralized, and the Irish Republican Army was no longer a real force.All this is the background to the types of action the Catholics undertook in 1967-8: the Civil Rights Movement which began the process of bringing people out of their shells to take initiatives like civil rights marches and demonstrations, sit-downs, rent and rate strikes and boycotts of local elections. Eventually, after their marches and mass meetings had been attacked by armed police and Protestant gangs, communities organized barricades and ‘no-go’ areas. These were Catholic areas where people began to run their daily life and defence themselves, through street committees and other grass-roots bodies in the locality.A woman I spoke to in Derry, an active community organizer, said that before the troubles people had been very depressed and demoralized, after all those years with no jobs and nothing happening. It had been hard even to get a tenants’ association going. Now people were doing a lot more together, socially as well as politically, especially women. Anything that had been done in the community in Derry, she said, had been done by the women above all.In Derry and Belfast we heard of projects run by women, like social clubs, a food co-op, committees to help people forced to flee from their houses. These kept up a network of social contacts. There was nothing much like them before the troubles. But these forms of protest and organization seemed limited as the need for military defence of the areas grew. It also became more difficult to meet and organize in this way once the army moved in. It was the Protestant backlash to the Civil Rights Movement which carried the Catholics’ protest to armed defence, in which many women took part.The Protestants had something real to defend. Giving way to Catholic demands wasn’t just a case of a few reforms here and there. It would mean a total reorganization of the structure of the society, down to the smallest local institution, and it would mean a real redistribution of resources in a province with small enough resources anyway.Protestant fury is expressed through the symbols of their historic victories over the Catholics. They parade on 12 July in celebration of the Battle of the Boyne. They parade on 12 August, the date of the Siege of Derry in 1689, when the Protestant apprentice boys held the town against the Catholic James II.The Protestants came from England and Scotland as settlers of land cleared of native Catholic gaels by the invading English armies of Elizabeth I and Cromwell. This past lives on because the same competition goes on today. The descendants of the apprentice boys, organized into the Orange Order, still hold the citadels of Derry, still run the town, and the Catholics still live outside the city walls, in the Bogside, on the economic margins of society, on the dole. These apprentice boys now march with their drums and flags along the old city walls overlooking the streets of the Bogside, flaunting their supremacy.Sectarian violence has always flared up most when the Protestants have felt most threatened in their privileges. In the late 1960s they were threatened by the Civil Rights Movement. But a deeper fear was that the new Common Market conditions were eroding Britain’s interest in a divided Ireland, and that Britain would withdraw economic and political support for the Protestant supremacy.Loyalist gangs attacked and burnt Catholic homes, setting in motion the train of events leading eventually to the direct occupation of the Catholic areas by the British army, and the internment of hundreds of men and boys.You have only to go to their houses to see how greatly this occupation has affected the lives of the women. Rooms are decorated with pictures and ornaments made by men inside: pictures of the ‘cages’ themselves (the Nissen huts inside the prison camps), wooden plaques with pictures of Connolly, leading republican and socialist shot after the 1916 rising. Holy pictures and photos of killed relatives and friends hang on the walls. Some women have leather purses made by internees, with republican slogans and symbols on one side and the woman’s name on the other.Of the women we met, several had husbands in	Magilligan and Long Kesh, and visited them every week in special coaches laid on by community organizations run by women. Food parcels are taken every week, costing over £6 a time. It takes a lot of a woman’s income, and some have more than one male relative inside, as well as a daughter in Armagh jail. Women also organize relief committees to help financially the families of internees, or general families whose homes are destroyed or relatives killed.The experience of the raids and arrest has given women a lot of courage, out of anger. As mothers, they have had to watch twelve armed men tear up the stairs at four in the morning and pull their kids out of bed, herd the whole family into one room, and search the house. Each time the identity of everyone in the family has to be established. The army in Ulster now has detailed files on the domestic situations and personal life of almost every Catholic. A woman in Derry showed us a brown envelope on which she had noted down the ages and dates of birth of her fourteen children. She just hands it over each time the army comes.Women have themselves been involved in the republican organizations, but I am speaking here only of the way the mass of women have been involved as a community. For example, in Derry, we heard that when the army first came in 1971, they took a school as their base. It was the women who got up a march and picket to move them out of the school.It is very much as mothers that women are moved to action against the army. This shouldn’t make us over here too sceptical. The Catholic Church and economic underdevelopment do make the family conservative and cohesive in N. Ireland, and this obviously does circumscribe the part played by women in current events. But because so much of the action has been in the communities, where whole families are involved together, domestic life and family relationships have been opened to change. For instance, out friend Jane has a poster in her window supporting the Catholic Social Democratic and Labour Party; her twelve-year-old son has put up beside it the Sinn Fein slogan ‘Boycott the election’. The politics and discussion in their daily lives gives parents and children new responsibilities to people outside the family. This changes their relationship to one another. In this situation the family is not just a conservative force: it is also part of the network of solidarity in the community.EMPLOYMENTFIGURES 1969	PROTESTANTS	CATHOLICSPopulation	66.6%	33.3%Civil Service Administration	93%	7%Local Government	94%	6%Health Service Administration	92%	8%Police	90%	10%Courts	86%	14%AREAS OF EMPLOYMENT(1) Shipbuilding and linenThese traditional industries are declining. The Harland and Wolff shipyard in Belfast has a 90% Protestant workforce. The 10% Catholics are all in low-paid, unskilled jobs.(2) Civil Service and local governmentPublic employment has risen since the 1950s. It is highly discriminatory, only for those ‘loyal’ to the state. In Derry, where Catholics outnumber Protestants 2:1, only 26% of public employees are Catholic. There are equal number only in laboring. In Fermanagh, a predominantly Catholic county, Catholics have 32 out of 370 local government jobs.(3)  Agriculture10% of the population work on the land, mostly in small uneconomic farms which need subsidies and reorganization. Government planning projects are leaving farming to stagnate. This means higher unemployment for Catholics, who can’t turn to public employment.In Antrim, mainly Protestant, 8.23% are employed in agriculture, and 5.9% are unemployed. In Tyrone, mainly Catholic, 23.5% are employed in agriculture and 13.45% are unemployed.[‘Mary McKay’ was a pseudonym for Sue O’Halloran. Ed.]SR.43, February 1976
Women in Chile: A Year after the CoupTRACY ULLTVEIT-MOEAccording to Mirtal Vidal, national staff member of the United States Committee for Justice to Latin American Political Prisoners (U S L A), ‘Among the worst victims of the junta’s repression are a group of women being held at two detention camps in Chile - El Buen Pastor (the Good Shepherd) in Santiago and the Tejas Verde concentration camp.’ The latter is possibly now closed. Ms Vida was speaking at a press conference held in New York on 5 June to make public a document recently received from Chile, but the evidence produced at the conference is simply the latest in a series of reports which have documented the torture and indignities inflicted upon women arrested in Chile since last September’s coup.According to material now available from several sources, political prisoners, both male and female, have been subjected to icy baths, hung by their hands or feet or tied to chairs for day on end without food or water, brutally beaten and whipped, and in methods apparently ‘imported’ by Brazilian experts, interrogated with the ‘aid’ of lighted cigarettes and electric shock equipment applied to the nostrils, eyelids, anus and genital organs. Psychological torture, such as threats to the victim’s family, accompanied by recorded cries allegedly made while relatives were undergoing interrogation and torture, is also used.And, as we have all too sadly seen again recently in Cyprus, women in time of war or civil upheaval are also vulnerable sexually, whether they are politically suspect or not. Instances have been reported of        SR.45arbitrary arrests of women, who have been released without interrogation after repeated rapes by drunken soldiers, while a recent report, submitted to the United Nations Committee on Human Rights and the United States Senate by a six-member delegation of the US branch of the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom, presents strong evidence that sexual abuse has apparently been adopted in interrogation centres as a standard technique in the questioning of female suspects. The victim is blindfolded and stripped in front of a roomful of men; she is then thrown from man to man until she falls. Multiple assault then follows. Cases of male prisoners forced to rape female prisoners under threat of further torture for one or both, have also been reported.The WI L P F delegation collected its evidence during a visit to Chile in January and February of this year; surprisingly they were permitted a short visit to the Buen Pastor prison referred to above. Authorities maintained that the approximately ninety-five women held at the prison were largely prostitutes or thieves, but the nuns running the centre told the delegates that in fact almost all were political prisoners. The detainees, almost all of whom were still uncharged, were initially afraid to speak to the W I L P F group, but when they learned the purpose of their visit, the prisoners crowded round, many with heads shaved or nipples burnt from electric shock treatment, and reported that prior to their transfer to Buen Pastor only two amongst them had not been raped.According to the prisoners, some women had had mice and insects inserted in their vaginas; pregnant women had been beaten until they aborted. In another case, the foetus carried by a woman subjected to electric shock treatment is still considered viable, but the prognosis is that the child will be born with severe brain damage. Other horror stories tell of prisoners being forced to eat excrement and semen.The women at Buen Pastor prison have improved the dirty, pest-infected centre since they arrived, but nutrition remains inadequate, and their most appalling complaint still stands; women who were repeatedly raped by unknown assailants and now find themselves pregnant have been refused abortions. When they requested a doctor, only an ear specialist was sent, and the women were told that they should be proud of ‘what they had in their bellies’. The psychological effects of such treatment can well be imagined and are already evident amongst many women and children.The WI L P F delegation also saw children who bore scars and had required hospitalization due to beatings they had received from soldiers who were intent on using any means available to locate the children’s relatives; they visited poor areas in Santiago and heard testimony concerning the hardships the poor were undergoing due to sky-rocketing inflation and the dismantling of welfare programmes, free milk schemes and health facilities initiated under the Allende government. Women told the W I L P F delegates of the typhoid epidemic affecting their children because authorities intent on keen surveillance in working-class areas had forced the removal of all latrines to the centre of the community.WI L P F also learned that other women whose husbands had been killed by the junta often could not leave Chile or obtain any sort of social assistance without a certificate attesting to their husband’s death, a document which was impossible to obtain in many instances where the junta denied that the deceased spouse had in fact ever been arrested. Other women have been stranded for months in foreign embassies where they had taken refuge following the coup. Junta officials refused to award them ‘safe conduct’ passes in cases where relatives were still being sought.With a fascist twist to a typical sexist technique, a pro-junta Santiago newspaper La Segunda resorted to ridicule as a means of diminishing the impact of W I L P F’s report on its visit to Chile. The newspaper’s article on W I L P F’s findings was headlined ‘Majaderia Internacional’ (perhaps weakly translatable as ‘International Jackassery’) and scornfully reported that the ‘little old ladies’ carried notebooks filled with appointments and asked questions about just how many litres of blood had been spilled in post-coup Chile.Nonetheless, the allegations by W I L P F that women in Chile have been subjected to vile degradations as human beings and as women have been supported by countless other bodies, including the Chicago Commission of Inquiry, the International Federation of Women, Amnesty International and legal and medical groups which have visited Chile in the last year. Courageous Chilean women have done their best to make these facts known abroad; the prisoners in Buen Pastor prison, for example, who risked further torture in order to tell their story, did so, they said, in order to protect the others, who are daily being brought to interrogation centres in Chile.SR.28, October 1974
Dora TamanaROSALYNDE AINSLIEDora Tamana lives in a four-roomed house in Nyanga, an ‘African township’ ten miles outside Cape Town. Her home has no bathroom, no floors, no ceiling, no internal doors (Cape Town Municipality provides these for it Coloured - mixed race - tenants, not for Africans). But the walls are decorated with family photographs and coloured pictures cut from magazines, and children run in and out.Dora describes Nyanga as ‘a place of persecution ‘, the houses ‘surrounded by dirt and filth, overflowing dustbins, flies and smelly lavatories - each used by two to three families’. Many of the houses are merely corrugated iron ‘pondokkies’, burning hot in summer, freezing in winter. The whole estate is surrounded by a high wire fence, with only one entrance that everyone must use. A police van guards the gate and residents are constantly searched for illegal liquor and their passes (permission to be in an urban area and to seek work, permission to work, tax receipts) are checked.In any case the township is gradually being convened, following government policy, into a barracks town for migrant male workers, who must leave their families behind in the homelands. Few of the little ‘family’ houses like Dora’s remain. Over the years many of her women neighbours and their children have been deported from the city. The police still raid Dora now and then, demanding yet again her pass with its precious permanent residence permit, in case she should feel just a little secure in the city where she has lived for forty-five years. She is now seventy-four years old.Dora was born in 1901 at Gqamakwe in the Transkei, the poor but still beautiful area of the Eastern Cape that is all that is left of the land of the Xhosas. Her father had no formal education, and taught himself to read and write, but her mother reached Standard IV at school (roughly equivalent to the fourth year in an English junior school), and Dora was able to do the same. She was brought up like every African village girl - she tended the poultry, sold eggs and chickens in the local market, learned to care for babies, to cook and sew, to clean the house with mud and wash the clothes with clay.In 1920, when Dora was twenty, came the first violent event that was to change her life. A ‘prophet’ named Enoch Mgijima had acquired a following in the area. He preached that Armageddon was coming, and called upon the people to join the Israelites, the Church of God, and to celebrate Passover once a year near his home at Buthoek. People came from all over the Transkei, some from as far away as the Transvaal, built huts and stayed for seven days. But this year, at the end of the Passover, they did not go home.‘When the authorities found the people still there,’ writes Dora, ‘the clash began. Enoch Mgijima replied to the government messages saying, “I have no right to disperse them because they are here by the will of God.” At the same time, he told his followers of the coming of i kongolosi [Xhosa pronunciation of the word Congress - the African National Congress was formed in 1912], telling them to support activities in the outside world, like the Kadalie strike [Clements Kadalie was the organizer of a nationwide African trade union, the Industrial and Commercial Workers’ Union, which grew rapidly during the 1920s]. But this was like a dream to me - a sweet dream. He said these people were fighting for our rights...‘They had a hymn that said “There is a great destruction coming in our land upon all those who won’t obey the Lord. They will be running to the rocks and mountains, saying Hide me from the face of an angry God.”‘Eventually the government gave the prophet an ultimatum. His people must disperse by dawn on 24 May 1921. The day before we heard that the soldiers had come, led by General Smuts [later to become Prime Minister of South Africa and Britain’s ally during the Second World War], and instead of Church service that evening it was a meeting of men only.‘In the morning the men waited in groups for what was going to happen. About 11 a.m. a voice came from the soldiers, “Put down your swords and sticks, otherwise we are shooting.” Oh, the people were shot dead. Nearly 200 of them died on that sad day. After the shooting, the soldiers marched to the “Holy City, of Natabelanga with their guns on their shoulders. They told the women to take water to the wounded men, lying in the bushes. The women carried the wounded in blankets. It was a sad scene. My father, Joel Ntloko, was among the dead, and his two brothers. The prophet Enoch Mgijima and the rest of the men were arrested, and the wounded taken by wagon to Queenstown Hospital and some to the Military Hospital at Wynberg, Cape Town.‘Mgijima was sentenced to six years. The elders and evangelists received three years each, and the ordinary followers, called “saints”, one and a half years, under the Riotous Assemblies Act.’Dora herself helped to carry the wounded from the battlefield. She had lost her father and two uncles, and within a year her mother was dead. She and her sisters went to live with one of their widowed aunts, a schoolteacher, whose brother was also an Israelite, imprisoned at Takai, near Cape Town.Among the wounded at Bulhoek had been a young man, John Tamana. After his discharge from hospital he returned to the Transkei, and in 1923 he and Dora were married. ‘He was working in a private house,’ she says, ‘for £1.10s [£1.50] a month. Between 1924 and 1930 I had four children, and three of them died - of starvation and tuberculosis and meningitis. I had to leave a baby of only a month with my ten-year-old sister so that I could go out to work for one shilling and sixpence [7 ½ p] a day. In 1930 we moved to Cape Town, in the hope that our children might have a chance to survive.‘My husband found work as a labourer in a timber yard, for £1.4s [£1.20] a week, and we stayed in a stable, paying eight shillings [40p] a month rent. Then he learned to be a driver, hoping to earn more, and in 1931 we got a house in Langa township [an African area just outside the city] for fifteen shillings [75p] a month.‘My husband looked for a job. He was nearly four months without work, and I had somehow to find something for the children to eat every day. Langa Administration hired him as a driver, but he had to work so hard for £3 a week that he gave it up, and looked for another job, up and down, up and down. We couldn’t pay the rent, so we were put out, and moved to town again. My husband found work as a driver, and we saved a little money. Then he decided in buy a car and set up in business on his own.‘We were not agreed that the money we saved should buy a car, but he told me I couldn’t rule his money, and bought the car. Soon enough it broke down and could not move. So the hardship was on me.‘After that my husband began to drink. Then he said he couldn’t save money with me and the children there, so he sent me back to Queenstown - me and six children, five of them our own and the sixth the orphan of my dead sister - the tears running down my cheeks.‘Within six months two of the children died, we were starving, and the children coughing. When my husband heard this, he came in his car to fetch us, and I was very glad to get back to Cape Town where I could make a living of some kind myself.‘All through 1937 my husband drank heavily, sometimes disappearing for days at a time. He paraded his girlfriends and his car in front of me, leaving me with the children, and nothing to eat. I struggled very hard.‘My husband became more and more difficult. He told me what I must do and how I should do it, what clothes I should wear. He tried to beat me, and to stop me going to meetings (I was taking a part in township political life by then). He told me to go to church instead. Then one day he said he wanted to give up drinking.‘And he did. But it was horrible. We had more arguments than ever, and once a real fight. At last one day in 1938 he took all his belongings - his clothes, a suitcase, his blankets, saw and hammer - and went away, to another woman.‘Somehow, among all out sorrows and difficulties, I never thought he could leave me.’But by now Dora had concerns beyond her personal anger and grief. She had been drawn into the problems of the women around her - working mothers, abandoned mothers, children who had no one to care for them, children with nothing but rags to wear and never enough to eat. She knew that the misery of the man who can never earn enough to support his family is an old misery. John Tamana was but one of thousands who stopped struggling, who drank to find, just for a little while, the illusion of lost manhood, who deserted their families when they could no longer bear the face of failure. Her anger began to be directed against poverty, the root of misery, and the racialism of a society that created poverty.Her political awareness was awakened during the war, when African and left-wing political activity were intense, and speakers addressed meetings every Sunday on the Grand Parade (Cape Town’s Trafalgar Square). They spoke of the struggle against fascism, alliance with the USSR, and the paradox of a white South Africa that fought a war in the name of democracy, and oppressed its Black majority in the name of greed.Dora describes these meetings, where speakers talked of ways the people might free themselves from oppression, the pass laws, the ‘chains of slavery’ and the loss of the land. ‘I recalled Enoch Mgijima’s dream of “i kongolosi”.’During the war food was scarcer than ever. Some of the more politically aware in the African townships and Coloured slum areas out on the Cape Flats began to organize self-help groups: the Women’s Food Committee and the Cape Flats Distress Association, which operated mobile food vans and won some support from city charities. But Dora felt that her main concern was the children, and education.‘I worried that the children of working mothers had no one to teach them,’ she says, ‘and to look after them during the day.’ She heard a speaker at a political meeting describe the USSR, where every mother could leave her child in a creche or nursery school when she went to work. Dora decided she too would set up a creche.She accepted twenty babies, from six months to five years. The youngest she tied on her back. Old soap boxes were used as cots. Each child was bathed daily, although water cost one penny a four-gallon tin and had to be fetched and carried across the sand. The children were fed as well as possible on the 6d [2 ½ p] a day that every mother paid. Although Dora herself was trying to raise five children on 30s [£1.50] a week, she made no profit from the creche. It was her gift of service to the community - and she taught what writing and arithmetic she could, drawing with a stick in the sand.When after the war Dora moved to the new house at Blaaulei (also on the Flats) she once again ran a creche, and this time she began to win public support. A training college for (white) nursery school teachers became interested, as did a welfare society run by university students. A committee was set up to raise funds and, once government permission had been obtained, a fine new building was constructed to accommodate forty children and a trained nursery school teacher. The children even had toys! Dora was triumphant.Then suddenly, within a year, Blaaulei was declared a Coloured Area under the Group Areas Act, which zoned all urban areas for exclusive occupation by a particular racial group. The Africans were given notice to quit. They lost their homes, their jobs - and the nursery school, achieved after so many years of struggle. Dora merely commented that Coloured children needed nursery schools as much as Africans did and they could use it until the day came - and it would - when African, Coloured and White children could use it together.The creche was not Dora’s only educational venture in Blaaulei. Around 1950, together with three friends, she started a school. Official figures numbered less than 50 per cent of school-age African children in the Cape accommodated in existing schools. They built, with their own hands, a hall of ironed-out petrol drums, their classroom for thirty youngsters. By 1953 the government was obstructive again - new legislation made it an offence for an African to run a school (even to teach a group of children informally) unless that school was registered with the Bantu Education Department, and thus run in accordance with the government’s apartheid principles.Throughout the early 1950s Dora became increasingly drawn into political action: she helped campaign to restore to African children the school feeding scheme; she was a member of a protest delegation to the Minister about the increase in bread prices; she became secretary of the local branch of the African National Congress; was active in the Communist Party and the Peace Committee; and supported the 1951/2 Campaign of Defiance of Unjust Laws, when thousands courted arrest by deliberately defying the racialist laws. She was a leader of the campaign against the removal of Africans during the mid-1950s from the Western Cape, and against the extension of passes to women.‘This is something that touches my heart,’ she told a meeting called by the African National Congress in 1953. ‘Who will look after our children when we go to jail for a small technical offence - not having a pass?’ And indeed in subsequent years thousands of women went to gaol, and thousands of children were left uncared for.In November 1954 Dora was elected National Secretary of the South Africa Women’s Federation, a non-racial (and therefore, in South Africa, highly exceptional) organization campaigning against the worst effects of apartheid on women. The following year she was chosen, with Lilian Ngoyi, to attend a World Congress of Mothers in Lausanne.But passports were denied to people with political records, in particular to Blacks. The notorious Suppression of Communism Act of 1950 had made the issue of a passport not a right but a ‘privilege’. New legislation was already under way to make it a punishable offence to leave the country without a passport.So, as Dora puts it, ‘It was a very hard journey when I went overseas in 1955 with my friend Mrs Lilian Ngoyi from Johannesburg.’ It was doubly difficult, for Dora, now in her mid fifties, was suffering from a chronic heart condition.Their first attempt, by mailboat, using tickets bought in the names of white passport-holders, failed. Dora and Lilian were dragged out of the women’s toilets just before the boar sailed. The gangplank was again lowered and they were put ashore. They stood on the dockside and watched the ship move away, ‘Lost,’ says Dora, ‘and disappointed.’ But the next attempt, this time by air, succeeded, although they were nearly deported by officials in Rome because they had no passports.Unhappily, Dora’s health deteriorated when they reached Europe, and she missed the Lausanne Congress. But both women were invited to visit China, Mongolia and the Soviet Union. This trip, with its revelations of the possibility of revolutionary change, she has remembered in the minutest detail. What impressed her most, in all the socialist countries she visited, was the standard of child care, especially the provision of creches and nurseries for the children of working mothers. The children, she keeps insisting, were happy.The opportunities for women, particularly in China and Mongolia, for centuries underdeveloped agrarian countries, delighted and amazed her. ‘It was a great surprise to see the women being doctors,’ she writes. ‘They are magistrates and lawyers. In factories the women are leading... I saw old Chinese women with tiny feet which had been tightly bound up when they were little girls, and this was a custom, like the Xhosa who cut their finger, first or second finger. But in these days the customs are rejected, they are things which weakened the people, for the Chinese women who had their feet bound walked like cripples.‘Others told me that in former times they were beaten by their husbands; yet today they do not feel the pangs of childbirth.‘Women in China are taking part in the government. And the Chinese are non-whites!’On her return she summed it up: ‘When I saw these things, different nations together, my eyes were opened and I said, I have tasted the new world and won the confidence in our future. This has been one of the wonderful, great experiences of my life.‘I came back to the country of my birth.’Dora’s political activities had drawn attention from the political police for some time, and she was harassed in a thousand small ways. On her return the persecution became serious. he was served with a notice under the Suppression of Communism Act ordering her to resign from a long list of organizations (including, of course, the African National Congress), and prohibiting her from attending any gathering (defined as more than two people) for the next five years, under penalty of imprisonment. Demands for her ‘permit’ to remain in Cape Town (she had lived there continuously since 1930, and was one of few Africans with a right to permanent residency escalated to a campaign of harrassment. She describes one of the police raids:‘One morning, early, I dressed in my national costume to go out to collect for our nursery when a European policeman arrested me, and drove me in a van from Retreat to Langa. But when I came there I was allowed to go free - because the pass laws for women were not yet gazetted! So that day I couldn’t do a collection for the nursery. That is the Africans’ life, in the country of their birth, waste of time, waste of energy, waste of money - under the low wages!’Again, a policeman came to Dora’s house demanding her pass. ‘I told him I was not carrying a pass. He pushed me into the van. I had Elizabeth, the baby, on my back. But a group of women came out to protect me: “If you arrest Dora we are all going too.” They surrounded the police van, singing.’ Two white policemen left the van to demand passes from other Africans. In their absence the African policemen who arrested Dora decided to let her go. ‘So they let me go free. The women shouted: “We don’t want passes. We want university education!”’Later, when she was living in Nyanga, ‘the police came in my pondokkie searching for passes. They found a bottle of methylated spirits, which they claimed was illegal liquor. Two African policemen took me to the van. I told them not to hurry me, I am taking all my grandchildren- there is no one else to care for them. I did not know that the children had their toys with them until we got to the police station. They sat on the floor, playing. The youngest, Benjamin Nqaba, was on my back. When we came before the Sergeant, the African policemen picked up all the children and set them on the counter and pointed to Benjamin Nqaba on my back.‘He said, ‘‘Look how old is the mother’’’ I was then sixty -one years old. And I was freed. I heard a European policeman arguing with the others, saying that methylated spirits is for lighting our primus stoves, and there is no offence in having it. I told the police to take me home with my children. They said to wait until a van is going to that area. So I went on my own in the bus.’On two occasions Dora was imprisoned. The first was in April 1960, when the government declared a State of Emergency after the massacre at Sharpeville. Some 20,000 people of all races were arrested and detained for four months. Not one was ever charged.‘I stayed in jail for four months and twelve days,’ writes Dora, ‘and these were hard days. Lying on cement floors with one grass mat. In the morning mealie [maize] porridge, lunch-time mealies. Meat once a week. Supper, porridge again. The cell had no window, no toilet but the open bucket which we covered with a bag. The drinking water in an open dish near the bucket, because there is no space. When we sleep, it is close to each other.’In 1963 she was arrested again, charged, as a ‘named Communist’ under the Suppression of Communism Act, with failure to notify a change of address. This was the most trivial of technical offences. To comply with government policy she had had to move to Nyanga, and there from one address to another in the same street - it was this change of address which she failed to report. She was sentenced to one year’s imprisonment, all but one month suspended for three years.When I was in jail I learned more about the pass laws. Some of the women came twice in one month to jail, most of them young women and girls who hadn’t had their passes brought up to date. The jail is full of victims of the pass laws.‘When I finished my sentence my ten grandchildren, left in the care of a fourteen-year-old girl, were in a bad position, sick, and of five at school three had stopped going.’Yet she said afterwards that she was glad she had had the opportunity of serving her sentence: there was so much that she could teach the women she met inside.Dora has brought up her own five children, ten grandchildren, and is now caring for a great-grandchild. Of her own children, only one daughter remains near her mother. The youngest son, Benjamin’s father, was drowned in 1962; and Bethwell ‘disappeared’ in 1963.For nearly five years Dora heard nothing of Bethwell. Then in November 1967 a letter came from Salisbury prison, Rhodesia. He was under sentence of death as a freedom fighter. ‘From the day that letter arrived, I prepared to go and see him,’ writes Dora. After much effort and help from many friends, she and her eleven-year-old grandson finally set off by train from Cape Town in December 1968. It was a journey of over 2,000 miles, and took nearly three days.‘The teacher with whom we stayed in Salisbuty took us to the jail. We saw detainees waving from a gallery, raising hands and fists, and we heard them shout “Amandla” [“Power to the People”, the slogan of the freedom fighters]. Then we went to the other side of the prison, to the condemned prisoners. That is the day I saw my son through a thick wire, hardly able to see him, asking him to turn this way and that, move back a little bit, and we were talking and laughing, speaking about preparations for Christmas Day.’The relatives prepared Christmas food for the prisoners. ‘A teacher who had a brother in jail with my son killed a goat for the prisoners. His wife baked cakes and fried chickens. We bought oranges, peaches, bananas, tooth brushes and paste, cigarettes and sugar.‘We went to the jail. We could see the prisoners waving to us, and they sang a song: “Oh so great my case is promoted to stand before the Judge’s bench!”’‘But we were disappointed. We were not allowed to see the men, and we went away with the meat, the chickens, oranges, cakes, peaches, bananas, tooth brushes, cigarettes and sugar.’Eventually, after intervention by a lawyer, they were permitted to give the non-perishable foods to the prisoners; and Dora’s grandson was finally allowed to see his father. ‘I spent a month in Rhodesia and was permitted to see one prisoner a week, and I managed to see four South African prisoners through a wire net.’Bethwell’s sentence was commuted to life imprisonment by the Smith government after an international outcry following the execution of several freedom fighters in 1968. And since then, every Christmas, Dora has managed to obtain permission to leave South Africa for Rhodesia and the two half-hour visits with her son.Her going is a gift.SR.39, September 1975
Women against the ShahsRUTH WALLSGROVE AND SUSAN HEMMINGSIt was the present Shah’s father, Reza Shah Pahlavi, who in 1935 ordered Iranian women to take off their veils. He sent his soldiers into the streets to tear them from women’s faces - not because he believed in women’s freedom, but because Iran had, and still has, an acute shortage of skilled labour, and he needed women workers. The veil, a chadoor, is not just a small piece of cloth. It’s a semi-circular piece of black material that covers the whole body and has to be held in place over the mouth, or at the throat, by one hand - impossible for women working in fields or factories. His decree worked; immediately after it there was a sharp rise in women in important industries such as textiles.The present Shah has told women, ‘If you don’t wear the veil, you’re liberated; and makes much of the ‘progressive nature of his dynasty. But under his regime women are still barely people in the eyes of the law, and their day-to-day living conditions have remained constrained and impoverished. And women who don’t wear the veil now in Iran have come to be associated with his rule - with the ‘westernization’ that has led to poverty, corruption and terror.Some of the many women who don’t normally wear the veil are now choosing to put it on for demonstrations against the Shah, to show their unity within the broad opposition- which includes conservative and anti-women religious groups. These women feel that the veil, and all it represents in terms of its mistrust and suppression of women, should not be argued about at this time: the important thing is to depose the Shah. They say that the veil disguises them from SAVAK, the Shah’s secret police, and makes it easier to approach other women in the street on the same footing. In other words, it’s a tactic. It doesn’t represent a return to religion.There are still many women demonstrating who disagree with wearing the veil, however. But the western press only picks up on the image of seas of black-robed women holding placards with quotes from the Koran, the Islamic holy book, on them. We see nothing of the other women, nor do we hear about women’s campaigns in the past.... The influence of the religious groups grows because there isn’t any strong alternative. The Left and feminists, illegal for years and harassed by SAVAK, are frightened to speak up until after the Shah goes. The danger is that unless they put forward an alternative, the mass of people - who are fighting repression and explanation - may only see the religious group opposing the Shah, and feel that the Left has nothing to offer them.... Some believe that now is not the time for Iranian feminists to make their demands - that women are not ready, and that there will be time after the Shah has been deposed and a liberal democracy instituted, to raise the consciousness of women. But will there? Already the Shah is making concessions to the religious groups - ending the conscription of women and on 14 December repealing the abortion law that at least allowed some women abortions.In Algeria women did raise their demands at the time of the struggle against the French, and were granted many of them by the nationalist forces; but as soon as the French had been kicked out, the women were pushed back into their homes again. There two the veil has been a symbol of resistance.SR.79, February 1979
Iran: Women for FreedomRUTH WALLSGROVETens of thousands of women marched for their rights in Iran on International Women’s Day, 8 March, and during the following week. Photos showed women massed to the horizon, angry and unshakeable even by the flashes, knives and guns of men who attacked them.Women were enraged at the apparently blithe assumption that now that the Shah was gone, and the ‘revolution’ here, they would all want to return to the veil and to their husbands’ custody. ‘On the dawn of freedom, there is no freedom,’ they shouted. The Ayatollah Khomeini had proclaimed that ‘women must not come naked into ministries’­ women clerical workers and secretaries were turned away by gangs of men when they arrived at work in ‘western’ dress. As one said, ‘We hoped this would be a revolution for all the people. We did not expect to be harassed because we were without a veil or scarf.’...SR.82, May 1979
United Nations Notices WomenJILL NICHOLLSThe United Nations - the name suggests the shadow boxing it will be. Disunited nations with disputed territories, armies of occupation, warring world views, unequal economics, sit in wide semicircles so they never have to see eye to eye, or even answer each other’s questions. ‘I want to thank the distinguished People’s Republic of X warmly for his most gracious statement and I now call on the distinguished delegate from the Democratic Federation of Y to take the floor.’ ‘I wish to thank Madame Chairman very kindly for her gracious invitation and to congratulate her on her election to this most high office of the conference...’Western capitalist democracies, socialist centralized economics, fascist military dictatorships sit side by side, in alphabetical order - Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Australia... Behind sit the UN bodies, big names like the UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) and the World Health Organization - dominated by the USA because countries are represented on them according to how much money they put in. Behind them the translators, a lot of press, a little public (corralled, contained, sworn to silence).The governments try to reach a consensus that can’t last outside the sterility of the conference centre; they argue over amendments to a document that bears little or no relation to reality. And as this is a conference on women- mid way through our very own decade - some countries have sent teams of talking women. Some haven’t bothered ­ the Soviet bloc for instance: men and women now being equal, what difference does it make if a delegate is male or female? As if to prove impartiality, most East European voices are male.The ‘General Debate’ lasts two weeks - the time it takes 136 representatives of governments, four observer delegations and several representatives of UN bodies to read out lists of their achievements. At half an hour each, that’s about twelve speeches a day, with a right of reply before home-time if you’re lucky.The only surprises here are the walk-outs (by other Arab nations when Madame Sadat of Egypt stood to speak) and the break-ins (someone shouting about the women living in their own shit in Armagh jail; anti-nuclear campaigners unfurling a banner). Spectacular sparks within this frozen spectacle.... The World Plan of Action is actually quite a radical document, if a bit vague. Were it implemented, the world would be unrecognizable. All the rights, opportunities and sharing of work demanded by the western women’s liberation movement in the late sixties and early seventies are covered. Its big weakness as a feminist programme is that there is no mention of sexuality (aside from the need for contraception, sex education and free choice of marriage partner), no mention of lesbanism, domestic violence or rape. Male power as such is not confronted, only ‘discrimination on grounds of sex’. And a movement of women to liberate ourselves is neither seen as necessary nor acknowledged as already existing and being the mam reason a conference like this was thought to be necessary. The best we get is a passing reference to ‘encouraging women to develop confidence in themselves and in other women, and a sense of their own value and importance as human beings’.Still, did you know that in 1975 Britain agreed to:Recognize the economic value of women’s work in the home, in domestic food production, marketing and voluntary activities.Re-evaluate and where necessary rewrite textbooks and other teaching materials to ensure they reflect an image of women in positive and participatory roles in society.Strengthen international peace and disarmament and combat colonialism, neo-colonialism, foreign domination and alien subjugation, apartheid and racial discrimination.Ensure, along with employers and trades unions, the right of all women workers to maternity protection, including maternity leave with a guarantee of returning to their former employment, and nursing breaks.And look at this one:Special attention should be given to ways of facilitating the combination of family and work responsibilities, such as: a general reduction and/or staggering of working hours; flexible working hours; part-time work for men and women (with governments and trade unions ensuring the full protection of the rights of part-time workers); childcare facilities and childcare leave systems to assist parents; communal kitchens; various facilities to help parents cope with household tasks more easily.Sound like Britain 1980? Or what Patrick Jenkins, Secretary of State for Social Services, thinks he’s working towards?Ireland also signed the World Plan: ‘All legislative, social or financial obstacles to the dissemination of family planning knowledge, means or services should be removed.’India signed: ‘The same right of women and men to have free choice of spouse and to enter into marriage only with their free and full consent should be ensured.’They all signed: ‘The principle of equal rights and responsibilities means that during marriage both partners should perform an active role in the home, taking into account the importance of combining home and work responsibilities and sharing jointly decision-making on matters affecting the family and children.’Some sections sound like the Scandinavian ideal of clean nuclear equality, especially with action proposals like these: ‘labour-saving interior finishes and surfaces conducive to comfort and hygiene.’Tell that to a Bedouin Arab, who might not want a dream kitchen. Or to a Kampuchean refugee, who hasn’t a hope in hell of getting one...MEANWHILE BACK AT THE FORUM…Radical, political, world-encompassing feminism was not easily created either at the forum - the parallel conference organized by Non-Governmental Organizations with an advisory status at the UN.... An amazing 8,000 women and a scattering of men did turn up representing traditional women’s organizations, population control agencies, national liberation movements, women’s professional associations, women’s liberation campaigns and publications, church groups, development organizations, their governments - or simply themselves.... The conflict between world politics and women’s issues was not confined to the official conference, though the unofficial forum put the questions differently. Debate here was less rhetorical - and often more openly angry. Most women spoke from their lived experience, saying how sexism and imperialism, for instance, interacted in their lives. ‘We women from the developing countries have been accused by some women of bringing politics into the forum,’ said an Iraqi woman at the first plenary. ‘But in our countries, politics is a matter of life and death. We see ourselves as women and also as fighters for the liberation of our country - these are not separate.’...Speaking itself was, sadly, another point of conflict at the forum. There were no translation facilities, except at the formal panel sessions. In the workshops, the dominant language was English, with occasional contributions in French or Spanish - usually obligingly translated into English, though no time was made for translating the English into French or Spanish! It was as if English was invisible, natural, while the other languages were ‘foreign’. An Iraqi woman said, ‘What happens in this forum is a reflection of the outside world. We are not being given a voice. We are made into a minority again.’Domitila de Chungara, active in the Bolivian Miners’ Wives’ Union and author of Let Me Speak, a political autobiography, struggled hard against being silenced by what she called the ‘barbarous discrimination’ of this language barrier: ‘Nothing at this conference is written in Spanish, so we don’t know where to go to discuss important political issues. We can’t read any signs, it’s not even clear where the toilet is. It makes it hard for us to participate in the conference, as much as we’d like to.’Ironically, Domitila ended up making probably more impact on the forum than any other individual. On the Friday of the first week came news of a fascist coup in Bolivia. About a hundred people from the forum - Bolivians and their supporters - hurried to the Bella Centre where the UN conference was taking place. Some sat in shouting ‘Domitila with us’, ‘Imperialists out’, ‘No to the Bolivian coup’, while outside with a megaphone, Domitila said, ‘We’ve come to a women’s conference to talk of women’s problems. We were invited to come - they must listen to us. Why did they ask us if they don’t want to hear?’...SR.98, September 1980 
12	WOMEN’S LIBERATION MOVEMENTThe women sewing machinists at Ford’s, Dagenham, who went on strike for parity with men in 1968, brought the issue of equal pay back into public awareness. Women who had become involved in the radical politics of the sixties through student activism, university sit-ins and protests against the Vietnam war and who were in socialist groups concerned with these issues, found that they were expected to take a back seat to men, to do the dogsbody work and were excluded from political debate. At the same time, women who had their job expectations raised by the opening up of mass higher education found that they were discriminated against in favour of men when it came to career and job prospects. For the women who met at the first British women’s liberation conference at Oxford in 1970 these various issues were not isolated from each other. The discrimination against women at work was linked to the responsibilities women had at home in caring for children. The way men dominated political or trade union meetings reflected the way men expected women to be submissive in private life. A movement for women’s liberation had to recognize that the spilt between personal relations and the more public world of work and politics is artificial.Women began to meet in small groups in 1969 to talk about their lives. The process of exchanging experience was called consciousness raising. It enabled women to see that attitudes and feeling were shared, not simply confined to the individual, and from there a group could draw out connections between their common experience and women’s social conditions. Sharing personal experience also released strong emotions which had been held in check, especially anger at the way women are treated. Women recognized that when they internalized the social view that men were more interesting or more important, they also felt contempt for themselves and for other women. By excluding men from their meetings women could see how much energy went into vying with each other for male attention and approval. Women needed to have time and space away from men to recognize these feelings and to learn to trust and value each other. This autonomy from men was the necessary basis on which women could develop their ideas, learn confidence and create a political movement for women’s liberation.Grouping together as women means that political action is not taken on behalf of someone else. It is to overcome your own oppression in conjunction with that of other women. The experience brought by each woman is valid. The idea that ‘the personal is political’ has been developed by the women’s movement to encompass various political tendencies which stem from particular needs and interests. The women’s movement has a multiplicity of political approaches, both in what changes are desired, in methods to achieve those changes, in its internal politics, and in its approach to traditional political areas. However, the majority of the new feminist theories, despite differences, go beyond demanding equal rights with men to argue that the whole of society must change to alter existing power relations and to achieve women’s liberation.The women’s liberation movement has placed as much emphasis on its ways of organizing as on its aims. Because women had been silenced by sexual hierarchy, we have tried to avoid hierarchical ways of working. The idea of the small group for democratic discussion is the basis of the movement’s structure, as is the idea of working collectively so that everyone will shape the outcome of a project. When large conferences are held to pool ideas and experiences, the decisions are made at a plenary session from ideas brought back from small workshop meetings. The movement has also had to become alert to the informal ways people can dominate by - talking all the time, not explaining theories, by emotional pressure - but these sorts of difficulties are secondary to the movement’s need to remain open and flexible, to allow for differences. The women’s movement is more than a political party or pressure group. It is a social movement which springs from women recognizing their oppression and gathering together so they can work to overcome that oppression wherever they find it in their lives. 
Adam’s Knobby RibSHEILA ROWBOTHAMThe arguments for and against women’s liberation are much older than you’d think. Chaucer makes his wife of Bath protest against the Church’s treatment of women. The clergy had a monopoly over communications.My God, if women hadde written storiesAs clerics hav with-inne hir oratories,They wolde han written of men more wicked verse,Than all the mark of Adam may redress.Old sayings, too, indicate that men felt women presented some kind of threat. ‘A woman, a dog and a walnut-tree, the more you beat them the better they be.’Controversy about women’s liberation was expressed in religious terms. People took texts from the Bible to argue in support and in opposition. An old pro-feminist ballad used the story of Eve’s creation to argue for female equality.She was not made out of his head, Sir,To rule and to govern the man,Nor was she made out of his feet, Sir,By man to be trampled upon,But she did come forth from his side, Sir,His equal and partner to be;	And now they are coupled togetherShe oft proves the top of the tree.But Eve’s temptation and fall could be used by others to show the weakness and wickedness of women.In the seventeenth century the question of women’s place came up in the context of religious conflict and revolution. The Puritans challenged the authority of king and priest, saying a man’s own conscience should be his guide to interpreting God’s will. But most of them regarded the authority of the father over his household, children, wife and servants as still sacred. They wanted liberty for the male property owner not his dependants. Economic changes in the organization of work were driving women out of some of the trades where their position had been protected by guild regulations. The Puritans had a strong suspicion of female sexuality. In the seventeenth century men thought women were lascivious and hypocritical - ‘Saints in the Church, angels in the streets, devils in the lecturn and apes in your bed’.However, there was another side to Puritanism. Women began to argue that they too should follow their consciences and interpret God’s will for themselves. Why couldn’t women become prophetesses? Small Puritan sects developed, all believing that they were absolutely correct. Women sometimes differed in their allegiance to these from their husbands. When it came to a conflict between the husband’s authority and the dictates of conscience some chose to follow the latter. Women, too, started to take more public political action. They petitioned Parliament in 1642 against popery and justified themselves by explaining that Christ had come to save them as much as men and that they had had to suffer from popery as much as men. By 1647 they were more confident in asserting their rights.‘Would you have us keep at home in our houses while men are fetched out of their beds and forced from their houses by soldiers, to the affrightening and undoing of themselves, and their wives, children and families... shall we sit still and keep at home?’In 1651 they gave voice to their powerlessness and grief in the Civil War. ‘We have for many years chattered like Cranes and mourned like Doves.’A strong anti-feminist tendency appeared in contemporary pamphlets. In response ‘Mary Tattlewell’ and ‘Joan Hit-him-home’ spinsters produced one called ‘The Women’s Sharpe Revenge’, defending woman on the old grounds that she came out of Adam’s side and was therefore meant to be man’s equal and companion.Thirty years later the debate was still going on, though the grounds of feminist defence had shifted to the more regular argument of natural rights. The anti-feminists were far from defeated. In the mid 1670s ‘The Women’s Fagaries’ showing the great endeavours they had used for obtaining ‘the Breeches’, supported male domination against their sex which had been made out of a ‘knobbly crooked rib’, and took a firm give ‘em an inch and they take a mile, feminists under the bed line on female aspirations.‘When Men unto their wives make long beseeches, the women domineer who wear breeches, their tongues, their hands, their wits to work they set. And never leave till they conquest get... Nothing will serve them when their fingers itches. Until such time they have attained the Breeches.’Three hundred years later Adam’s knobby rib is still struggling and the monstrous regiment has grown and multiplied.SR.1, July 1972 
‘A Serious Proposal to the Ladies’SHEILA ROWBOTHAMIn the last quarter of the seventeenth century several feminist women of letters appeared. The early connection of women’s rights with the puritan revolution disappeared and feminist arguments took shape in a new context. Women like Hannah Wooley authoress of The Gentle Woman’s Companion in 1675 and Mary Astell who wrote A Serious Proposal to the Ladies in 1694 argued for a useful place for women in the new world of commerce, science and the professions. They wanted to be accommodated in the emergent capitalist society as equals to the men in their class, not as dependants.Hannah Wooley criticized men for thinking women were merely intended for propagation and household tasks, ‘had we the same literature they would find our brains, as fruitful as our bodies.’ Education seemed to be the reason for women’s inferiority. As formal education and the teaching of specialized skill became the mark of sex and class privilege to those who were excluded, women and ‘the inferior sort of people’ struggled for knowledge as a means of breaking down the discussion of labour which made women of the upper classes spend their life in helpless leisure and exhausted the poor in ceaseless toil.Picking up on a remark of Pope’s comparing women to tulips, Mary Astell asked: ‘How can you be content to be in the world like tulips in a garden, to make a fine show and be good for nothing?’In the new world usefulness and business went together resulting in power but women were content to accept a position which was only decorative. She assured men that they could only benefit from women’s improvement. ‘The men if they rightly understood their own interest, have no reason to oppose an ingenious education of the women since it would go a great way towards redeeming the men.’The scheme of ingenious education was a kind of Protestant convent ‘rather academic than monastic’ on Church of England principles. She saw this as filling the gap in female education since the closing of the Catholic convents at the Reformation. She imagined the growth of a new learning in a place where ‘ladies nauseating the parade of the world’ could pursue knowledge in cloistered academic solitude.She gained some support in court circles, raising money from aristocratic women like Lady Elizabeth Hastings, of whom the journalist Steele had said ‘To love her is a liberal education.’ Even the Queen wanted to give £10,000 but was persuaded not to by a bishop on the grounds that it would lead to the dreaded popery.Inevitably Mary Astell was opposed on anti-feminist grounds as well. Swift satirized proposals for a women’s college in the Tatler in June 1709, by inventing a correspondent called Charles Sturdy who was being rejected by an intellectual ‘Platonne’. Sturdy announced:‘It is my misfortune to be six foot and a half high, two full spans between the shoulders, thirteen inches diameter in the calves, and before I was in love, I had a noble stomach and usually went to bed sober with two bottles.’Swift advised him to woo her with flattery and told an imaginary tale of the visit of a group of gentlemen to an academy of ‘Platonnes’. Amongst the visitors was a well-known rake who flattered the women by saying he wished ‘men might rise out of the earth like plants, and that our minds were not of necessity to be sullied with carnivorous appetites for the generation, as well as support of our species’. By devious means the gentleman in the story get their way. ‘There was hardly one of them but was a mother or father that day twelve­ month.’In September Swift returned to the attack and ridiculed the presumption of women who would reject ‘Scissors, needles and samplers’ for ‘pens, compasses, Quadrants, books, manuscripts, Greek, Latin and Hebrew’ and military exercises.These two themes of anti-feminist attack were to be replayed many times. Feminists were portrayed as blue-stocking celibates swelling with suppressed desire or absurd Amazons aping men.Defoe however was more sympathetic to the idea of a female academy than Swift, perhaps because he was from a dissenting family and had experienced discrimination. He had been educated at a Nonconformist academy in Newington Green, North London. In 1698 in his Essay on ‘Projects’ he wrote:We reproach the sex every day with folly and impertinence; while I am confident had they the advantages of education equal to us, they would be guilty of less than ourselves... The capacities of women are supposed to be greater, and their senses quicker than those of men; and what they might be capable of being bred to, is plain from some instances of female wit, which this age is not without. Which upbraids us with injustice, and looks as if we denied women the advantages of education, for fear that they should vie with men in their improvements.He did not believe in ‘female government’ but thought women should be fit companions for men. This was the new ideal of marriage as a relationship between companions which had first appeared in the puritan movement and was to challenge the authority of aristocratic property marriage in the eighteenth-century novel. The right to a marriage of conscience had already been hinted at in the dissenting tradition which asserted the equality of conscience and the right of improvement, spiritual, intellectual, social and economic of all, regardless of sex or station.SR.2, August 1972
Women against the Demon DrinkAMANDA SEBESTYENWhat was the biggest feminist organization a hundred years ago? With 30,000 members all over the world, fighting around everything from the vote to prostitution to lynching to child labour to kindergartens to dress reform? Who was its charismatic leader, the most famous woman of her place and time?The organization is long forgotten: The Women’s Christian Temperance Union. ‘It is probable’, their leader the American Frances Willard once remarked, ‘that if a passer-by were asked why we are gathered here, he would exclaim, “Because they are a lot of cranks and fanatics, who do not know what they want, except to take away the poor man’s glass of beer and spoil his hours of recreation.”‘ That judgement has come down to us to this day. But there was a time when temperance (or teetotalism, or Prohibition) was part and parcel of every struggle for women’s rights.Bars, after all, were and are male territory. A ‘Masculine Republic’­ or, in the words of a modern feminist, ‘tavernacles invulnerable to female intrusion, an extension of the buddy system, a place where men get away from their wives’.‘They tell me,’ said Frances Willard, ‘that the saloon is the poor man’s club. When I hear that, I often say to myself, “What is his wife’s club, I wonder?”‘ Alcohol primed male violence, then as now. (In 1976 the National Council of Women interviewed battered women in a northern hospital: ‘70 per cent were assaulted on Friday or Saturday nights or Sunday lunchtime by their husbands on their return from the local pub or club.’)The fight against ‘King Alcohol’ became a metaphor for the sex war. Drink gave a reason for finding men unbearable and justified withdrawing from them. Drink and tobacco were ‘the great separatists’ between the sexes, wrote Frances Willard.... Violent anger and physical disgust at men, otherwise tabooed, could be expressed in the temperance cause. ‘If I were a young woman,’ Carry Nation exploded, ‘I would say to the men who use tobacco and who would wish to converse with me: “Use the telephone, come no closer!,” I would as soon kiss a spitoon as kiss such a mouth.’Like the campaigns against slavery in the USA, and ‘white slavery’ - state-organized prostitution - in this country, the temperance movement was a training ground where women learned to speak and organize. It was seen as the equivalent to a union: ‘One drunkard’s wife prostrate beneath his hobnailed shoes can do nothing but moan and agonize, but if she joins herself to the great groups of women who have banded themselves together to work steadily on to avenge the indignity under which she suffers, this indignity will cease.’Again, like the movements against slavery and the ‘regulation’ of prostitutes, the temperance struggle brought women up against the organized power of men from the ruling class downwards. Josephine Butler, leader in the fight against prostitution and also a member of the flamboyant Good Templars, saw slavers, white slavers and drink dealers as part of the same ‘privileged and protected class whose interests are opposed to the best interests of the mass of our people’.... The temperance movement was part of a humanitarian wave opposed to child labour, capital punishment, blood sports (the movement’s first lecture theatre was a converted cockpit), and for universal suffrage. The radical teetotallers campaigned for drinking fountains and libraries, and for galleries and entertainments to open on Sunday. As the prices came down, they set up coffee houses with papers and space for meetings. They needed - and made a whole temperance subculture to support themselves.Though history records the pioneer teetotallers as ‘The Men of Preston’, a very high proportion of the movement were women. From the start we hear of incidents like the women’s teetotal picnic in Wychwood Forest, broken up when ‘drunkenness, ignorance and brutality, in the shape of men from the neighbouring village, surrounded the platform’. The reasons for the antagonism are clear. ‘Every pay day the pub was besieged by wives desperately anxious to feed and clothe the family’ (Drink and the Victorians). In most parts of the country it was impossible for women to earn a living wage outside of prostitution. The pub was also the local brothel, with rooms upstairs for the poorest prostitutes and small huts close by for the better-off. The barmaids themselves - ‘white slaves of the bar’ - were still working ninety hours a week by the end of the century, on wages so low that alcoholism seems to have been a happy relief. Radical and Chartist women were sure of a big response to speeches which brought temperance together with the rights of women and sometimes even birth control.In America, the founders of the women’s rights movement were also in the New York branch of the women’s temperance organization. Susan B. Anthony had begun her public career with a group called the Daughters of Temperance; the first feminist magazine, AmeliaBloomer’s Lily, was originally ‘Devoted to Temperance and Literature’, moving on to become ‘a monthly journal devoted to the Emancipation of Woman from Intemperance, Injustice, Prejudice and Bigotry’. For these early feminists the central temperance issue became women’s right to divorce from drunken husbands. Elizabeth Cady Stanton was even more outspoken: drunken husbands raped their wives. ‘Alas! Alas! Who can measure the mountains of sorrow and suffering endured in unwelcome motherhood in the abodes where terror-stricken women and children are the victims of strong men frenzied with passion and intoxicating drink?’ The most fundamental of women’s rights, said Stanton, was ‘the right to her own body’- the right to refuse. Shocked audiences correctly interpreted this as an attack on the heart of the marriage institution. Susan Anthony, as a spinster, was torn apart by the press for daring to urge women not to let drunkards father their children. Less daring feminists like Lucy Stone admitted in letters that ‘the abuse in question is perfectly appalling’, but felt that ‘premature’ discussion would ‘frighten women away’. Perhaps she was right- there was a conservative takeover of the New York branch after Stanton’s declaration on divorce at the 1852 Temperance Convention. The radical feminists withdrew to concentrate on the vote, though they remained temperance advocates all their lives.... In November 1874 Frances Willard founded the Women’s Christian Temperance Union. Their programme was ‘destruction of the liquor traffic, a living wage for all workers, an eight hour day, equal civil rights and equal moral standards’. Over the next twenty years, in fact, votes for women and Prohibition became almost synonymous. The Prohibition Party was the first to promise women’s suffrage, and it was accepted that wherever women got the chance they would vote the towns dry. At any state referendum on women’s suffrage the brewers would line up all the barkeepers to keep the women out.There was one other goal that all the feminists agreed on. They called it by the daunting name of Social Purity. But what they wanted, like us, was an end to the sexual coercion of women. Frances Willard defended the unmarried mother: ‘a phrase that we must chase out of the dictionary of common speech is the phrase “an illegitimate child”. No such child was ever born. The only illegitimate factor in the problem is the father.’ The W C T U’s Social Purity Department demanded harsher penalties for ‘white slavers’, rehabilitation centres for prostitutes who wanted to find other work, and an age of consent fixed at eighteen (in twenty of the states it was ten). There was a White Shield department of men who promised never to exploit women sexually. The W C T U campaigned against insulting advertising images:A woman sees a poster on the hoardings that by the exhibition made in figure and attitude painfully impresses her sense of self-respect; but [alone] she can do nothing to banish the billboard... Organize that woman into a group with others who have felt the same sense of degradation, and something can be done.It was a life-sized Cleopatra in a Kansas hotel that started Carry Nation on her one-woman war: It is very significant that pictures of naked women are in the saloons. Women are stripped of everything by them. Her husband is torn from her, she is robbed of her son, her food and virtue, and then they strip her clothes off and hang her up in those dens of robbery and murder.’ Carry Nation smashed a bottle over the picture and returned next day with several rocks and a steel rod to sweep the bar clean. A maverick never quite disowned by the W C T U, she travelled alone through Kansas, Illinois, Ohio and on to New York, paying for her cart full of brickbats and axes by sales of her Smasher’s Mail and souvenir hatchets in cardboard. At over six foot, she had all the makings of a folk heroine.In the meantime Frances Willard was notching up her twentieth year as president, averaging 20,000 miles a year and one speech a day as well as all her writing and lobbying. She was widely regarded as a saint, or ‘the uncrowned queen of American womanhood’. Strangely enough this immense fame and her personal power over the WCTU’s huge membership don’t seem to have stopped her learning and growing. She herself became more and more radical.It was only our ignorance of the condition of the industrial classes chat magnified a single propaganda and minimised every other so that Temperance people in the old days believed that if men and women were temperate all other material good would follow in the train of that great grace. But now we know that... there are millions of men and women in Great Britain and America who would gladly work, but the pitiless restraining hand of invention and monopoly hold them back... For myself, twenty years of study and observation have convinced me that poverty is a prime cause of intemperance.She called her new position ‘gospel politics’. At the giant St Louis People’s Convention in 1892 Willard tried for a merger between the WCTU, the Prohibition Party (which had just polled its highest-ever 270,000 votes), the woman suffragists, the Knights of Labor, the Federation of Organized Trade and Labor Unions, and the radical farming Granger and Populist parties. She failed; both temperance and feminist movements entered a very conservative period, lobbying to get laws passed from above not by grass roots action. The initiative passed from the WCTU to the male ‘Dry Boss’ leaders of the Anti­ Saloon League.... The British Women’s Temperance Association had been inspired by the Women’s Crusade and by another remarkable American organizer, Mother Stewart, who had the marvellous idea of using the law to help drunkards’ wives sue the saloonkepers for damages. She met and impressed a Scottish organizer, Mrs Parker, at the Chicago Temperance Conference, and was invited over to inaugurate the first British women’s temperance conference in Dundee in 1874. The new Association’s paper, The White Ribbon, steered clear of open feminism but made a strong plea for women’s right to go out into the world- in the interests of the home, of course:The cold-hearted critic may make his strictures, and tell us that our sphere is in the kitchen or the parlour but not the public platform... We shrink from public interest and popular gaze, but the true wife and mother cannot be content to merely shut down the windows and bolt the door of her house to secure her own safety so long as the tyrant alcohol prowls around her home, stealing her sons and daughters the moment they cross the threshold.B W T A speakers linked temperance to the Factory Acts against child labour, the repeal of the Corn Laws, the abolition of slavery, even dress reform - but not to the vote.Then in 1890 the Association elected a new president. Lady Henry Somerset was a suffragist and a radical, a ‘traitor to her class’ who mounted platforms beside dockers and miners. She was a sexual outcast who’d dared to leave her husband after years of misery and to sue for custody of the children. Her meeting with Frances Willard in 1891 began ‘the most beautiful friendship that has ever blessed my life’. The two women’s politics were close, and when Isabel Somerset took over the Women’s Signal she hoped to embody Willard’s conception of the temperance movement as ‘a clearing-house for reform’.Some of the longstanding B W T A workers took a more doubtful view of ‘the do-everything policy of out American friends’. They were afraid of ‘saddling our Association with so thorny a subject [as votes for women, thought one] which most of u as individuals cordially approve’. They were reluctant to work around prostitution: ‘If the association adopts this line of work, mothers will feel unable to bring their daughters to out assemblies, for it is the subject of all others unsuited to young minds.’ Above all, they disagreed with the new president’s ‘gospel politics’, her view of alcoholism as a disease caused by social conditions, and statements like ‘we are too prone to say that all poverty comes from intemperance.’The new magazine may have been a shock to the hardliners - who called for ‘more Gospel Temperance matter’ but it was a wonderful read. There were interviews with novelists like Sarah Grand, artists like Rosa Bonheur, suffragists like Millicent Fawcett, trades unionists like Amie Hicks; pieces of feminist history like the winning of the Married Women’s Property Act; theoretical articles by Josephine Butler; discussions of Froebel infant teaching.Social Purity campaigning was a central theme, for as the music hall and the mass circulation daily developed they brought with them Victorian equivalents of the strip show and the Page Three Girl - favourite subjects were women posing in pink tights for ‘The Turkish Bath’ and ‘The Greek Slave’ (complete with manacles). The Signal gave warm support to the women picketing music halls and denouncing sexist covers and advertising images. At the same time - and unusually - the magazine supported women art students who’d been refused the right to draw male nudes, taking a clear line against ‘amusements that degrade women for the purposes of gain’ and not nakedness itself. Isabel Somerset herself was not a complete Prohibitionist. ‘She believed that, if the claws of the trade were cut, wine-drinking might be as innocent a pleasure in England and America as it is in France.’The B W TA committee was made of sterner stuff. The final straw for them was probably the Signal’s serial, an advanced story of professional women with one heroine breaking off her engagement after a night at Ibsen’s Doll’s House, and the other falling tragically in love with a married man. A majority of the committee voted that the president should resign. Instead, she asked for a vote from the rank and file, and at a special conference the local branches supported her new policy. The committee resigned and formed the British Women’s Total Abstinence Union. To them, the decision looked like a victory for Isabel Somerset’s personal charisma over political principle. But I’d like to think the majority of the temperance women were casting a vote for feminism and not just a glamorous new leader.The Signal went on from strength to strength, edited by Florence Fenwick Miller, the only woman leader writer in the national press (are there any now?) and the first woman in England to follow Lucy Stone’s example and keep her own name on marriage- simply changing from ‘Miss’ to ‘Mrs’ Fenwick Miller. The Signal retained its liveliness, with debates on ‘Should Women Play Football?’ and dress reform. It was better organized, with more subscribers and advertisers. But in 1897 another split occurred, and feminism and temperance never came together so closely again in this country...SR.100, November 1980
JessieEDITED BY SUZIE FLEMING AND GLODEN DALLAS‘You’re a bonny fighter, Jessie, but you’ve got the wrong name. I think we should call you Battling Bella.’Thus, as Jessie Stephen says, does the labour movement coin nicknames for those it really respects. Jessie is now eighty-one. A socialist and pacifist all her life and, before the First World War, a militant suffragette – a political connection which she remembers as typical of many women’s experience at that time – she is still now involved in trade union work and is a fierce believer in full and genuine equality for women. She was the first woman president of the Bristol Trades Council, an office she only gave up a couple of years ago.The eldest of eleven children of a caring, though overworked mother, and of a skilled tailor, who was nonetheless quite often out of work, she was brought up in some poverty. From an early age Jessie took various jobs after school hours to help keep the family going. Her father was, from the beginning, a member of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), which was established in 1893 specifically to work for parliamentary representation for, and by, the working class, but which in practice in its early years encompassed a wide range of labour and socialist opinion and activities.Here Jessie’s early political career is told in extracts from her unpublished autobiography and from recorded conversations with Susie Fleming and with Gloden Dallas, who edited and annotated the material.Good gracious, when I was fourteen my father gave me Darwin to read. It was double dutch to me then, but when I was a couple of years older I did read it and appreciated it. He used to read all the Rationalist Press publications and stuff by Engels and Tom Paine, though he left school when he was eight.I was a member of the Socialist Sunday School. My dad insisted on us all going there, and what we learned was in no way inferior to the ethics taught elsewhere. We had all sorts there - we had Catholics, Protestants, Jewish children. We all went in it together. Two of our family were christened there. There were about fifty to sixty boys and girls every Sunday morning, but in the afternoon I had to go to the ordinary religious school because Mother was very devout in that respect. She was C. of E. and Dad, of course, was agnostic, more or less, and when the parsons used to come and visit us, there’d be quite a set to.Jessie did well at school and won a scholarship, but felt that without a regular wage she would only be a burden on her family. So she became a domestic servant and started trying to organize her fellow workers ‘below stairs’.At fifteen I became a pupil teacher and was much elated, for it had always been my ambition to reach. Unfortunately for my dreams unemployment became worse so there was nothing for it but to leave school. I had to choose between taking jobs which ran between half a crown and four shillings a week, and the prospect of domestic service where board and lodging helped the money wage. And it was my experience that there were far too many employers who treated their domestic help as slaves. And the sons of the house, they thought they had a right to walk into your bedroom - that’s a fact. If a girl got pregnant they sacked her, and if a son was responsible they sent him away. But the girl never got any money. If she couldn’t go back to her family there was nothing else she could do but go on the streets, and a lot of them did, sometimes girls of fourteen and fifteen.And these domestic servants, they were much more intelligent than people gave them credit for at that time. Employers used to talk about them being ignorant Highland so-and-sos. They weren’t so ignorant. When I began to think about ways and means of organizing my fellow servants and started to canvass in my spare time, I was really encouraged by the interest the girls showed. I tried to get their support for a trade union. And this work was beginning to get results in recruitment of members of the new Scottish Domestic Workers’ Federation, subscription three halfpence weekly. I used to go round the back doors of big houses, getting the girls to join the union.About the same time, in her late teens, Jessie was much involved in socialist and suffragette agitation in Glasgow. It was through these activities that she was brought in touch with John Maclean, perhaps the greatest of the Clydeside socialists and also with Helen Crawfurd, a Women’s Social and Political Union (W S P U) militant and socialist who was, like Maclean, an uncompromising opponent of the Great War.Well, I got my political training when I was only twelve years old. I was selling the Labour Woman outside the St Andrew’s hall, Glasgow. That was a very small magazine, they only paid a ha’penny for it in those days. Keir Hardie was the speaker, and when he came out and saw me - I was very tiny then - he said, ‘Ah, that’s all right, lassie, ye’ll be a real credit to the movement yet.’ I was so proud of this I ran all the way home and told my dad, and he says, ‘Maybe you will, maybe you will.’I became vice-chairman of my local ILP branch, Maryhill, when I was sixteen. That was the youngest age you were allowed to join as a full member and, around that time, I became a member of the W S P U in Glasgow and attended branch meetings and demonstrations whenever I could. It must have been when I was in service. I know that because that’s how I was able to drop acid into the postal pillar boxes without being suspected, because I walked down from where I was employed in my cap and apron, you know, muslin apron, black frock, nobody would ever suspect me of dropping acid through the box.Mind you, we in the W S P U attacked property but never life. As far as the more violent things were concerned, I don’t think the ordinary working woman was quite so anxious to be in that sort of thing. They didn’t mind the smashing of plate glass windows but they felt the other things, for instance the burning down of castles, were risking human life and they were against that. You could see that there was a sort of dissent to the widening of the violence.We had these regular meetings, open air and indoors. And we used to get big meetings. It wasn’t a question of hole in the corner. And for women to come out like that, and with the Liberal Party doing practically everything they could to smash the whole idea of what the women stood for. I know the Liberals are always claiming to be progressive, but they were out bitterest enemies. They could’ve given us the vote way back in 1910, but they wouldn’t do it and we had to wait till the end of the war, and then got it at the age of thirty instead of twenty-one.All kinds of people came to our big meetings, working women, even working men, and I think the idea of the middle-class men was that this must not be allowed to continue, and this was why we had all the interruptions at the meetings and so on. That one was pretty violent when Mrs Pankhurst was on, and she was released under the Cat and Mouse Act. That was pretty violent that might because the police had been so careful - they were on the roof they were in the hall, all over the place - to see that she didn’t get into the hall. Then when the chairman announced that she had the greatest pleasure in announcing the arrival of her respected and beloved leader because you used very emotive words - everybody thought it was a joke. But we didn’t because we knew that something had happened. We had all the platform with barbed wire around it, with bunting over the barbed wire, with flower pots and all sorts, and one woman had one of those revolvers with blank shot. And when Mrs Pankhurst stepped forward, you should have seen the faces of the police. They couldn’t believe their eyes.Nobody told them how she got in there, but we were told afterwards that she came in the Corporation laundry basket. The WSPU organizer got in touch with some of our Labour councillors - well, they were ILPers in those days - they were very good. Well, when the police tried to drag poor Mrs Pankhurst away, they rushed forward to the bunting and got their hands all lacerated. We were throwing flower pots, there were all sorts banged at the police. You didn’t think about it being violence, you only wanted to protect the woman you’d brought there. The police were absolute bullies in those days, and the Daily Mail and papers like that were working up some sort of agitation; we were having the clothes torn off our backs, the hair torn out of our heads before we’d ever been violent. Some of the ordinary men were even worse than the police. They threatened to throw me in the river once and I said, ‘Well, if you throw me in, I’ll take you with me.’ And that was trying to be brave but, you know, you were scared to death. To counter such hostility the Glaswegian suffragettes, and similarly those in other provincial cities, could rely on a network of support, much of which came from within the local socialist movement.Och, yes, there were my comrades in the branch. There were three or four of them who were dockers who were really keen ILPers, really keen. They certainly passed the word along, and when the meeting took place there they were, lined up against the walls. Nobody suspected, of course, that there’d be anybody there to help these poor, weak women. Weak is right, too. Yes, we had quite a lot of help from ordinary working men and women in those days. Then there was Mr Austin who had a chain of tea rooms, the ordinary cheap tea rooms in the city and he used to give me the free use of them for my meetings. That’s the kind of help we used to get.Mary Miller, who was the woman editor of the Glasgow Herald, was very sympathetic to the socialist movement and also to the domestic servants. She believed in the work of the W S P U although she couldn’t declare herself. We had a curious combination. You had very wealthy women, upper-class women, and the ordinary working woman, but we got on well together. I remember Helen Crawfurd who was an ILPer. She went to gaol for breaking windows, and was gaoled during the war, as was John Maclean. Good old John, I knew him well because he used to come and speak at some of our meetings and demonstrations. They treated him cruelly. He was held in very high regard in the socialist movement, no doubt about that.Jessie’s feminist convictions kept her loyal to the militant policy which pursued in such a single-minded way the achievement of the vote as a panacea for all the ills inflicted on women. Her socialism, and feelings of the ‘ordinary’ women whom, by the nature of her work and social background, she met day to day, convinced her that the vote alone was no solution to the problems which women were having to face.There was a lot more than the vote. You see, most of these books­ I’ve read a good few of them at different times - they don’t really go very deep. They don’t talk about the discussions we used to have, the aspirations the ordinary member of the W S P U was thinking about. These were about jobs, about wages, about the present matrimonial laws. All that sort of thing used to be discussed by us. I didn’t know a lot about it, but some of these women did. One of them was a divorcee a socialist, mind you - and a very hardworking woman, and she used to bring up things like this which were interesting to people who knew something about it.And those of us who were socialists were far more interested in economics than they gave us credit for. Some of these women who were really active in the W S P U had deep convictions about the economic state of society, and there was the question of housing, and the question of making life easier for the woman in the home, and maternity benefits. The vote was only the means to an end, to a new state of society where women could be treated as human beings, not as second-class citizens. Largely as a result of her political activities, Jessie found congenial work hard to find in Glasgow. She went to London, where she made contact with the English Domestic Workers’ Union and, with their aid, found a job with people who did not object to having a trade unionist maid.After the outbreak of war she returned to Glasgow, and did various jobs which, until then, had been regarded as men’s work, just as hundreds of other domestic workers had been tempted to try their luck in wartime occupations. It was during this time in Glasgow, that Jessie met Sylvia Pankhurst who was campaigning for adult suffrage and an end to the war.Naturally I introduced myself to Sylvia. She asked me what I was doing and told me a lot about her work with the Workers’ Suffrage Federation (W S F) in London. As I moved away she said suddenly, ‘How would you like to come and work for me?’ I said I would like to come to London but I did not have the fare and would have to ask my father first. Dad was pessimistic. He told me not be foolish and to stay where I was, but Mother was more sympathetic. One night she handed me some money when we were alone and said I wasn’t to tell anyone where I had raised it. Till now I have kept the secret of how I raised my fare. In Bow, where Sylvia had her headquarters, she had established a creche and a clinic and, though her strong pacifist views were not very popular, her work in this district was highly regarded and she herself almost worshipped.When Sylvia decided that Jessie had had enough experience in organization and propaganda in London, she was sent to the provinces to start new branches of the W S F and to raise money for the work in Bow.There were two of us, Mrs Boyce, a working woman who’d brought up a family of twelve kids and was going round the country, just like me. She gave me lots of hints as to what to do. She says, ‘Always take with you a pound of candles because you’ll find in some places no light, when you’ll want to read in your bed and you can’t.’ She was a lovely old soul, I must say. She’d been in the W S P U and, of course, she was a socialist as well. She was a fine worker. She was fifty. I think of some of those women there in the East End.When I was working for Sylvia I got thirty bob a week and it wasn’t enough sometimes to pay my digs when I was travelling through the country. But I used to go to the ILP branches as well - freelance, of course, because none of us were on a salary - we just had to depend on the branches to pay us what they could. They might manage to give you £3 one week, but others couldn’t raise that. So they gave you hospitality and expenses.You couldn’t buy new clothes on that. In fact, I went to Burnley market once and bought a remnant there for 6d to make myself a blouse. My first stop on the W S F tour was Sheffield where I was lucky enough to find lodgings with Mrs Manion. The friendly atmosphere helped me enormously in this first provincial venture. The author Edward Carpenter lived just outside Sheffield and Mrs Manion told me of her interest in his books. Her favourite was one whose title I can’t remember now, but I think it was The Coming of Love [Love’s Coming of Age]. Over this she would enthuse and recite passages from memory. In the socialist movement it was very widely read.Jessie was very successful as a fund raiser, due in part to her capacity to get on with, and through to, ‘what they call the lower echelons of labour’. Her usefulness didn’t prevent, though, a few rows with Sylvia who could ‘charm when she liked, but at the core was inclined to be as autocratic as her mother and her elder sister, Christabel’.She continued to work for the W S F until spring 1917, when she was chosen as an ILP organize for Bermondsey, in which branch the leading figure was a Quaker, Dr Salter.The doctor felt we must attract the women and girls in local factories - in short, I was to act as industrial organizer as well. But because the ILP saw my industrial work was putting burdens upon me, it was decided to appoint two other women to help build up the political organization.Eventually I had two ex-suffragettes, Mary Richardson, who slashed the Velasquez painting, and Ada Broughton. Between all my other activities, I stood outside factory gates, handing out union literature. Success did not come at first, though a wage increase won for leather workers had aroused much attention. But by autumn 1918, over 5,000 girls had been recruited [into the National Union of Women Workers].Most of Jessie’s life since that period has been spent as a political and trade union organizer, with particular concern for the problems of women. In the twenties she was active in the Workers’ Birth Control movement.I’ve had people coming up to me at my meetings, asking my advice because they knew I belonged to that group and, you know, you listen to some tragedies. It’s not because they wanted children but they didn’t know how to stop them. The Workers’ Birth Control people really were pioneers. They used to hold propaganda meetings and issue little pamphlets.Curious thing, when I was secretary to Leonora Eyles who wrote for Women’s Own when it was a 2d magazine, if she ever had an article on birth control, do you know, we’d be flooded out with letters of inquiry for weeks later.The methods were a bit crude then. There was either what they called the ‘cage’ in those days or, apart from that, there was a fine sponge with a silk thread attached to it, soaked in quinine and olive oil, or quinine and linseed oil, but preferably olive oil because it didn’t smell so. They had to insert this, and immediately after intercourse, they pulled this down because they’d impregnated the womb with this stuff and that prevented conception. You know, my mother used to speak to me, being the eldest, you see. She’d say, ‘I don’t know; I wish I didn’t have all these babies.’ I said, ‘Why don’t you ask Dad to do something about it?’ She says, ‘Oh no, he says it’s not natural.’ A socialist, mind you, and he hadn’t learned enough about that. It so happened that, a few months later, I came across a book which gave all the information and I handed it to my mother. I said, ‘Now, mother, here’s your chance, read this.’ She was forty-two at the time and she didn’t have the menopause till she was fifty-four. She had no more children though. That’s what you call teaching grandma to suck eggs.For a young girl of her time, an independent and unconventional life like Jessie’s can have been neither personally easy nor readily acceptable to society at large What were these difficulties and rewards?In those days it was unusual for a woman, especially a young woman, to lead an independent life. And a woman speaker was fair game as I learned in the days of the suffrage campaign. One heckler in Sheffield shouted, ‘Would you rather sleep with a woman or a man?’ Remembering a somewhat similar question put to a prominent suffragette and her reply I said, ‘A woman, wouldn’t you?’ There was a burst of laughter at this and he silently stole away.Some of the women lived together but of course the ordinary working girls never got to that stage. They hadn’t got the philosophy to start with and they couldn’t have afforded to live like that it’s still true. There isn’t the money there. They might be prepared to experiment if they had the means. There was also a cult of free love in the socialist movement in my youth but we won’t go into that too deeply.As to my public political life, my dad was quite proud of it as a matter of fact. He used to come to meetings with me and all that sort of thing, but Mother wasn’t so keen on it. You know, she says to me, ‘You ought to be thinking of having a home of your own instead of rushing about all over the place.’ And later on in life she used to say, ‘Look at all your sisters, what lovely homes they have’ and so on and so on. My dad was with me then. ‘What’s wrong with this home?’ he says. ‘She’s got a lovely flat here, nice furniture all on her own. I wish I’d been able to do what she’s done.’The curious thing about my mother, even though she was so quiet and the very opposite of my dad, when the deaconess came up to her once and said, ‘Oh, Mrs Stephen, you must be so hurt over your eldest daughter and her brother’, preaching peace you see. She says, ‘When the country’s at war they should be doing their bit.’ And mother says, ‘I’m not ashamed of my boy and girl. They’re doing what they were taught by their father when they were youngsters. I’m very proud of them. I wish all my boys and girls had taken that stand.’ And the next May Day procession, there was mother. She’d never gone on a May Day procession in her life, and with a little pennant, marching.It would be inaccurate and unjust, by concentrating on the events of more than fifty years ago, to give the impression that Jessie in any way lives in the past. She was the first woman president of the Bristol Trades Council, an office she only gave up a couple of years ago, and is still active in the T U C. How does she estimate the progress of women since the winning of the vote?Most of my public work has been concerned with the organization of women and advocacy of their claim to equal status with men. Too many assumed that the victory on women suffrage would bring other benefits automatically. When the women were glorying in this new ­ found so-called freedom, we were only just beginning. For those of us who looked ahead, it appeared to be the beginning of the real fight and so it has proved to be, despite the small gains made on the way. Take the myth about bra-burning fabricated by the American press. Such an incident never took place and yet male journalists and radio and television broadcasters continue to repeat the lie every time they find an opportunity to sneer at women’s liberation. Truly, you need seven-league boots to catch up with an untruth. For me, and others who share my views, this is another example of the prejudice that dies  hard in out menfolk.SR. 32, February 1975[Suzie Fleming is a member of the wages for Housework Campaign.]
Nine Years TogetherBELSIZE LANE WOMEN’S GROUPThe London Women’s Liberation Workshop - a network of small groups with an information service - was the first organization of the British women’s movement. The Workshop in its original form no longer exists. A Woman’s Place has taken over as an information centre, local centres have mushroomed, groups like Women’s Aid and the National Abortion Campaign have developed along separate feminist lines.But the small local women’s groups which used to be the backbone of the Workshop are still alive: Belsize Lane was one of the first. They are still meeting after nine years.At the peak of the Workshop there were seventy small local groups. When the Belsize Lane group began in 1969 there were only two or three other groups. We were very conscious that the Workshop’s structure was completely different from the traditional Left from which many of us had come. Our women’s groups were deliberately small and federated to avoid the pitfalls of centralization and hierarchy. We wanted to redefine the meaning of politics to include an analysis of our daily lives, so although we discussed feminism in other countries like Vietnam and Cuba, and read feminist literature from Europe and the States, we concentrated on who we were and what we could do now in our own country.We wrote a statement called ‘Our Point of View’ which became the basis for the Workshop Manifesto reprinted in each issue of Shrew. Shrew (begun in 1969 and briefly called Bird and Harpie’s Bizarre!) was the Workshop’s monthly magazine. Each issue was as different as the group which produced it - political discussion, poetry, personal exploration, psychology, Third World. Shrew was ‘6d for women and 9d for men until equal pay’. In May 1971, the Belsize Lane group produced an issue of Shrew on the family. It was the first time most of us had ever written or produced anything collectively. We began nervously and ended with a real sense of achievement.Most of what we wrote in those days seems more angry and passionate than articles in feminist magazine today. Do women entering the movement now, when feminist ideas have become fairly common currency, experience the same sense of revelation and exhilaration that we did then?Certainly the ridicule and cruelty we received from the press helped our own solidarity. Our views and activities were misrepresented by all the papers - particularly in relation to: 1) leadership (they couldn’t understand out non-hierarchical structure); 2) attitude to men (they thought we wanted to devour them for breakfast); 3) bra-burning (that one died hard). We insisted on being interviewed by women journalists only, but of course this was no guarantee that we would be taken seriously or that there would be no editorial intervention. For example, Jill Tweedie wrote a mocking article on the Tufnell Park group in 1969 and the Sketch did a two-page spread with plenty of pictures headed ‘Inside the Sex Revolution Headquarters: Sketch exclusive on a plot to destroy the masculine ego’!Mary Holland’s article on the Oxford Conference was sarcastic and patronizing: ‘Hell Bent On Women’s Liberation’. But a growing number of women journalists, these among them, though derisive at first, later joined the movement or at least became close sympathizers.The movement was growing so fast that by the beginning of 1970 we felt confident enough to hold a national conference. Three hundred people were expected; six hundred arrived. Women, and some men, came from all over Britain, and a few from Europe, to Ruskin College, Oxford.The groups and individuals who came had never met as a body before and although there was often strong disagreement among us we all felt an exhilaration knowing that we were at the beginning of a new movement. There were proposals that we research into women’s history; that we lobby for a Sex Discrimination Act; that we campaign for free contraception and abortion on demand; that we study alternatives to the nuclear family and childrearing. Though many women at the Conference did not have children, questioning their assumed role of motherhood was a dominant theme. Several sympathetic men organized the first movement crèche - now a commonplace, but then a total innovation. Ellen and Sue from Belsize Lane were in Liberation Films which organized a crew to film the conference. A Woman’s Place was finished a year later.In the autumn of 1970, Carole represented our group on the committee which organized the first national women’s demonstration since the suffragettes. Thrashing out the four demands, even organizing the practical jobs proved surprisingly difficult. The Ministry of Works didn’t help either, refusing our request to use Trafalgar Square for fear we would do something obscene. Angrily we announced we would march there anyway, and permission was finally granted.The weather on the day of the demonstration - 6 March 1971 - was unbelievably cold with sudden bursts of snow, but a massive crowd of women, men and children gathered at Speaker’s Corner. Down Oxford Street we went with floats and badges, and placards listing the finally ­ agreed four demands: ‘Equal Pay Now; Equal Education and Job Opportunities; Free 24-hour Nurseries; Free Contraception and Abortion on Demand’. All the way there were chants: ‘Out of the office; Out of the home; Out from under; Women unite!’ The Women’s Street Theatre Group, with grotesquely made-up faces, danced the whole way to the music of an Eddie Cantor song: ‘Keep young and beautiful; it’s your duty to be beautiful; keep young and beautiful, if you want to be loved.’After presenting a petition at Downing Street, the march arrived at Trafalgar Square where there were speakers on the four demands, a play performed by the Street Theatre Group and a collection taken up which vastly exceeded our expectations.In the weeks following the demo, the Workshop was suddenly enlarged by fifty new groups bringing the total to sixty-six. The growth was so sudden and enormous the Workshop could hardly cope with it.1969-71After the march we got involved in a wide range of activities, sometimes as a group, and at others only a few members. We were invited, as most groups were, to speak all over London - to schools, colleges, trade unions, women’s institutes- and we went in twos to show that, though we were in common agreement, no one person could represent the movement. A few of us were involved in the demonstrations against the Miss World Contest and the subsequent trial of some of the demonstrators. But many of us felt critical: the protest created misunderstandings and an image of the women’s movement which took years to dispel. It allowed the media to ignore the other important women’s issues such as abortion, equal pay, sexuality, the family.1972 Wimpy Bars‘No unaccompanied woman will be served after 11.00 pm.’ We staged a late-night protest at the Finch ley Road Wimpy. The staff were friendly; the manager absent. Later that year other groups organized a more comprehensive campaign and the ruling was changed.1971 Feminist Film WorkshopSome of our group when in the original Tufnell Park Group had made a ten-minute silent film: Women, Are You Satisfied With Your Life? Using stills from magazines it showed the complicity of advertising in idealizing woman as housewife. We all recognized the power of media images and the potential of film for radical organizing. Many women, even in the movement, had never seen the films available on feminism, so we organized the Workshop to show as many of these films as we could (in those days still most films were from the US) and teach anyone who wanted to learn how to project films for themselves.We showed rushes from A Woman’s Place, the documentary about the Oxford Conference and 1971 women’s march which two of our group were editing. And proceeds from the Film Workshop went to Sue towards making One, Two, Three about the Children’s Community Centre.1971 Children’s Community Centre onwardsOur groups campaigned for play centres for after school and in the holidays, to be run on more radical lines than the few centres that actually existed. There were several meetings with local parents, leaf­ lettings and discussions but people lived quite far away from each other and the activities drifted.Two of us from Belsize Lane began organizing in greater earnest for better pre-school provision. With five other women, only one other in the movement, we chose a redevelopment area, Highgate New Town, near where one of us lived and got to know each house as it became, or was about to become empty.After eighteen months’ hard work we finally opened a nursery, the Children’s Community Centre. It has a man and a woman worker, is co-operatively run, is as non-sexist as possible and publicly funded... though money has always been a problem. The council has finally given permanent premises at The Children’s Community Centre, 20 Lawford Road, London NW 5. These kinds of activity meant that some of us were spending less time with our specific women’s group and more time applying feminist politics in community action. All of us continually took the ideas and projects back to the group for discussion.Audrey Battersby, age 42; Student Counsellor; also involved in Abortion/Contraception Campaign; kids: Ben, 15; Anna and Frank, 13.Sally Belfrage, 41; Writer; Eve, 11; Moby, 9.Sue Crockford, 35; Youth Centre leader; also involved in Children’s Community Centre and One Two Three Films; Barnaby, 8.Carole de Jong, 41; Potter; in Women’s Art Group, Nightcleaners’ Campaign; Max, 9.Nan Fromer, 37; Editor for educational film-strip company; was in Women in Media; Jenny, 12; Megan, 7.Mica Nava, 38; Research Student at Institute of Education; previously in Women’s Theatre Group, 1973-76; Zadoc, 13; Orson, 11; Jacob, 8. Carolyn Roth, 31; Nurse.Dinah Brooke, 41; Writer; previously with Women’s Street Theatre Group and Women’s Psychology Group; Emily and Felix, 12.Judith Brandt, 32; Psychotherapist; was in Women’s Psychology Group.Sally Fraser, 28; Acupuncturist, photographer; previously involved in Claimants’ Union and Women’s Newspaper.These last three are in India with Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh.The present Belsize Lane group was formed in 1970, after the first Women’s Conference at Oxford. But many of us had been going to meetings since 1969, at Tufnell Park, Belsize Lane or elsewhere. We had become involved for broadly similar reasons, but there were certain doubts that persisted in the early stages.Nan: Like many experiences that have shaken me to the core, my initial involvement was largely accidental. Late in 1969, a woman I barely knew invited me to a woman’s meeting in Tufnell Park. ‘They call themselves revolutionary socialists,’ she said. Without a second thought I accepted, secure in the knowledge that, whatever their aims, attending this meeting was bound to be an improvement over plopping my weary pregnant body in front of the telly in out freezing sitting room for yet another evening.Fifteen minutes after our arrival, I was aware that I would not miss another of these weekly meetings if I could help it. If it did not provide me with instant sanity, it did provide assurance that I need no longer consider myself a candidate for the ‘funny farm’, since so many of the women arrayed in that small sitting room, despite their surface differences, seemed to share what for so long I had believed to be my own idiosyncratic suffering.Sue: I resisted joining the women’s movement for a few months. I was told it would divide the Left. And it took me some time to acknowledge that ordinary daily events could be political. How could the solidarity of 16 million Vietnamese struggling and winning against 200 million Americans compare with the underachievement of women?But I’d been teaching, and I’d become very conscious of how girls seemed to lower their sights in early adolescence. I had a son I delighted in, but I couldn’t reconcile myself to a life restricted to four walls. I found I could neither be comfortable in a purely private life nor easy in formal left-wing groups: I found them competitive and lacking in humour. It was really through discussion with Sheli Wortis, for whom I had a deep affection and respect and who was in the same Vietnam Solidarity group I was, that I overcame my fears that to meet as a group of women somehow wasn’t serious enough.Mica: At eighteen I vowed never to marry. Before I was twenty-four I spent years in New York and in Mexico: I was independent and active. By the time I was twenty-nine I had married and had three kids.Before the first, I was aware and afraid of what motherhood might bring: I wrote in my journal that I wanted to avoid the trap of obsession with petty housewifely concerns. Yet I chose to have a child because I felt it would be as ‘creative’ as finishing the novel I had started - and easier. I was Earth-Mother: home births and breast-feeding and all that. I felt enriched by babies. But in patches I also felt unproductive, depressed and increasingly conservative.After the second child I started teaching, and I felt justified in using my wage to pay someone to help look after the kids. During the political fever of ‘68 I wanted desperately to find a space in which I could be active and involved. My husband spent weeks at the Hornsey College of Art occupation; I felt strongly about Vietnam, about the May events in Paris; yet there seemed no way for me to be involved without feeling somehow fraudulent. Besides, I had to look after the kids, didn’t I?A few weeks after my third kid was born I went to my first women’s meeting with the Tufnell Park group, in September 1969. Initially I resisted a good number of the new ideas presented there because they represented a direct attack on much of the way I’d been living - but all the same I went assiduously and was very excited.The next year or so was probably the most explosive and passionate of my life. We had embarked on the long and difficult task of ‘Changing The Way We Lived’, which meant endless battles about the trivia of sharing daily domestic responsibilities, as well as the struggle with issues of sexuality, possessiveness, living in groups, property...Audrey: I first became involved in the women’s movement early in 1969 after two of the most difficult years in my life. My marriage broke up in 1967 leaving me with three small children, one of them brain­ damaged by whooping cough vaccine, to bring up alone. The feelings of despair, failure, anxiety about the children (how could I cope?) were almost overwhelming.Predictably, I leaned heavily on a few women friends and we spent many, often happy enough, hours looking after each other’s children and belly-aching about men, clothes, menstruation, and wondering where it all went wrong. Why did marriages fail? Why didn’t we feel fulfilled by motherhood? We tried to analyse the problems, even held meetings to discuss childcare and education, but we never made the links between politics and out individual feelings of disillusionment and discontent.Then an old friend and I attended a short course run by Juliet Mitchell on ‘The Role of Women in Society’ at the Anti-University, and we began to read people such as Betty Friedan, Hannah Gavron and Shulamith Firestone. Then the bells rang and the connections were made and there was that feeling of excitement, a dawning sense of militancy that I’d never experienced before despite involvement in various left-wing groups. I was no longer alone, but part of a movement which was primarily political but could be personal to me.But I also suffered at first from reservations - a hangover from male ­ dominated left-wing groups? I was worried about separation, revisionism. What had Miss World demonstration got to do with revolution? I didn’t want to be seen as an angry, castrating ‘Women’s Libber’.Slowly, however, reservations faded as the sense of group solidarity and support grew. The group has caused us all to change and see our lives in a different light: in bad times it gives us courage and optimism; we are critical and loving.Discussions in the early meetings were deliberately and excitingly personal, but they were also quite structured and productive. We would take a topic and at the end of the meeting try to draw out general principles.Nan: Among the many early discussions, the ones which most radically altered the course of my personal life were on the family. Disenchantment with the existing nuclear structure was not a new idea introduced to me through women’s liberation, but our discussions brought it into much sharper focus. Perhaps the single most important idea that emerged for me was that the way you live your life is a political statement. In terms of the evils we had discovered in our dissection of the family, this came to mean for me a commitment to trying to find a viable alternative in communal living.Mica: Another important area of discussion was childcare. In the winter of 1969/70 we had read and talked about a paper written by Sheli on maternal attachment, first delivered at the Oxford Conference. It was a critique of Bowlby’s hypothesis (subsequently popularized by Dr Spock) which suggested that children separated from their mothers were likely to suffer permanent emotional damage. Sheli’s paper also examined how these theories had been used as justification for keeping women at home (in their place!). She pointed out that there was evidence to indicate that what kids needed was a stable, stimulating and caring environment and that this could be provided just as well by the father as by the mother, or in fact by several people - ‘in certain societies multiple attachments were the norm’.In the political and intellectual environment of today it is hard to imagine the impact that this paper had on some of us with young kids. I had accepted without question (but over the years with increasing disquiet and resentment) the idea that the care of kids was mainly my responsibility, and like others of my generation I was wracked with guilt about the harm I could do my children through absence. So this paper was, for me at any rate, perhaps the single most significant and liberating experience of the early movement.Sally: We began as fragments, guilt-ridden, inadequate as people (because mere women- no, not women, we were only girls then, whatever out ages); and by bringing out depression to each other like a gift, an offering of pain, we gradually drew each other out of our isolation. At any given time the change didn’t seem so remarkable, though it was becoming apparent that life could be confronted, we could get up in the morning and bit by bit even enjoy what followed. And Monday nights became a treat, an addiction. There was always one beautiful and strong woman in every meeting. Sometimes she remained the same person for weeks; as often she shifted. She was her, or her, or them, or me. It taught me new ways to love myself, by loving all of us.The group served as stretcher and crutches to those of us limping out of our relationships (the big ones, the children ones). At the start, all but two of us were in a similar predicament, mothers of small children with no one to turn to for help but their fathers, and then not even them as the bottles started falling off the wall. The first step was finding reliance and support in each other to combat isolation, finding the muscle to stand alone and bear the weight of self and of children, the courage to try new work, and finally to correct the warps and distortions in our relationships.Sally: We have a peculiarly protective, even suspicious, set of feelings about each other’s mates. We know the pain of these romances better than the bliss: no one has bothered to reproduce the emotions that got her into a marriage (though short-term affairs are happily discussed and in a way renew us all) but we’ve learned vicariously as well as on our own about the fears of living with male incomprehension, callousness, cruelty, possessiveness. Familiarity with what is by its nature a one-sided case about the man of one woman can make it hard to understand what she sees in him at all, and when a specimen has had the nerve to show us his face I’d often sooner punch it than embrace it. (This usually comes as a great surprise to him, whoever he is.)To redress the imbalance we’ve gone to each other’s parties, had picnics, even tried inviting them to meetings. And they’ve been human enough, even if you sometimes can’t avoid that German-soldier feeling (kind to their mothers no doubt; can they help it if they just followed orders?). It’s unfair: very. But they’ve been unfair to us: verier. Let a few of them feel what it’s like, ignorant prejudice based on species, not character. They’ve all survived it, anyhow, even if they didn’t learn anything much. (That wasn’t the primary purpose of it, after all.)Sue: The very strength of the group can affect a sometimes fragile relationship with a man. I sometimes feel conflicting loyalties. Mostly I feel completely open to discuss a particular man with the group. Sometimes I don’t - either because I think he’ll feel betrayed or because I know myself to be in a suggestible frame of mind and because the group knows me and not him, so I’ll be the one to receive support and understanding and the situation will be unfair.At one meeting we sat in a circle and each of us spoke for ten or fifteen minutes as if she were the person on her left and described the reasons why she was with her particular sexual partner. It was eye­ opening, and for me, with no experience of encounter groups or psychoanalysis, these were the stimulating and original meetings; I took political discussion and plans of action for granted. For others in the group, the revelations were the other way round.Sally: The women’s mags would say we’d failed, denying our children the live-in dad. But what the children have instead is honesty: they’ve witnessed out efforts to overturn the false premises of our and their existence, and what they’ve lost in fairytale stability - so often just a pantomime for the neighbours and relations - they’ve gained in being part of building something true and real. Maybe it’s only an easy way out to claim they’re better off, but the only available evidence tangibly supports it: out children are all extraordinary people. A case of so far so good? Well, typing on paper is knocking on wood.)We had enormous problems about the size of our ‘small’ group. Sometimes fifty or sixty women would arrive; each week six to ten were new. We had already talked through many problematic areas and wanted to move forward together; yet the group was becoming unmanageable, even disintegrating as women left it in frustration at the increasing numbers and the necessity to return to issues that the core group had already explored. Eventually we decided to close the group to newcomers. We were accused of elitism, but we felt the group would collapse otherwise. In retrospect, we think we were right.One way of resolving the problem was to ‘foster’ new groups: two or three of us would meet with a new group for several sessions, until it was on its feet as it were; in this way we spawned the Daleham Gardens and Chalk Farm groups. Looking back out action seems paternal/maternal... but we were ourselves threatened and that seemed the only way out.Even after the group was closed, it took a few years to shake down to its hard core. Some original members - Sheli, Carolyn, Laura, Ellen ­ went back to North America (though Carolyn returned); and perhaps because they were particularly strong and active, their loss gave the slightest hint of disaffection in others exaggerated weight. Thus, when Michelene left she couldn’t merely say ‘So long, I’m moving on’; the event became a major drama.Michelene was brave to face up to it. She felt ‘the defensive nature of the small women’s group had been superseded by a much more general climate of discussion about sexism in our society, and this undermined the political importance [of such groups].’ She recognized the value of the support we could give each other, but wanted us to be more than that: ‘I had recently joined my union at work, was getting interested in discussions among feminists of the need for political study groups, and felt impatient at the apparent lack of interest from other women in the group at these things.’In the context of her own political development, Michelene’s decision made a certain kind of sense. But perversely, her position helped solidify the very tendency of which she had complained.We became not more but less politically active, and this led to Sally Fraser leaving too. While we talked about putting ourselves on the line, Sally wanted to do it. Of course we had children, we rationalized, and couldn’t take mad risks; but all the same we were devastated by her decision. Were we really becoming the people we’d warned ourselves against?Our spirits sagged and, for weeks turning to months, meetings were irregular, people coming late or later, and it was less than ever possible to redeem out lost group-confidence by organizing energetic political pursuits when nobody was around anyway and whoever was felt despair at the desertions, which now extended to Sheila, whose symbolic importance as the face on the big demo poster had been matched by her strenuous efforts on behalf of the Family Allowances Campaign; and by Liz, who with Sheila appeared in the feminist drama Holocaust. Imogen left for a group at L S E.Mica: 1971 was the year when Michelene and Sally Fraser left us; by then the group had started to become a little less central in all our lives. The first flush of passion had died, and it was at this point, I suppose, that the rest of us reconciled ourselves to a change in the quality of our involvement with the group.In 1973 or ‘74 we started to meet about every two weeks for dinner in each other’s houses. We were no longer politically active as a group, although several of us were active as individuals or with other groups. What we could provide for each other was a crucial network of affection and support within which we were able to sort out our political ideas and personal problems.Audrey: Even when we’d opted out of the Workshop and felt we’d lost our political perspective, the group still didn’t break up. It continued to live an organic life of its own - we needed each other to feel complete.I remember one summer, ‘73 I think it was: we had a long break for about three months. And I became aware whilst I was away on holiday that I still related to the group as a kind of alter-ego never to any individual woman but always to the group, as if it had an existence, an identity, greater than the sum of its parts.Our next problem in division started when Dinah announced that she was visiting an ashram in India.She returned dressed in orange and wearing a picture of Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh around her neck.As she increasingly exemplified the ‘surrender’ that Bhagwan advocates, Dinah was loath to meet us and our barbs. Eventually, however, she came to a meeting with Judith, whose own sympathies were coming round to Dinah’s. The meeting became a passionate discussion of death.Dinah had just witnessed a friend’s terminal illness at the ashram, and participation in the Indian rites had been revelatory for her: she no longer feared death, she said, but was learning to see it as part of an inevitable cycle of birth and rebirth. She met with outraged argument: how, as a feminist only recently aware of the myths put upon us by men, could she accept a rationale which so obviously suited the Indian ruling classes? The quarrel seemed to evoke the bitterest passions and had obviously touched a deep anxiety in us all.Since then, Judith and Sally Fraser have also gone orange; all three are at Poona at this writing, with their new names and preoccupations: a source of wonder to some of us, and anger to others.But the threat of death...? We’d always made brave notes about ageing, but how ready were we for old age, let alone death? The idea arose (broached with the sort of phoney bravado that disguises the greater panics) to stay together and to help each other to die as each wished, with informed support based on a thorough understanding of our needs and wants. We drew calm immediately from the idea. It has given us a renewed sense of continuity and value to each other; we’ve got a renewed sense of security in the knowledge that we’re together, in greater or lesser numbers, to share the rest. And so, it appears, we have a future.Carole: The most profound effect of the movement has been on ourselves. We can look back over eight years to some external reforms in our society, but not nearly enough and not in the revolutionary way we at first envisaged. Sad too is the fact that most men, on a personal level, have been totally unaffected by the movement. We have left them behind. But as for the group, there are now such feelings of warmth and trust between us that I can hardly imagine my life without the presence of these women.Mica: Whether or not this can still be called a ‘political’ group is an issue which remains unresolved and is an example of the type of disagreement that exists within the group. Although most of us have kids, are more or less of the same age and have known and loved each other well all these years, we are not more similar to each other now than we were. There are important differences of interpretation about the history of the group and there are political differences (some of these have been thrown up by the writing of this article, the first ‘action’ taken collectively by the group for many years). We see each other infrequently as individuals between meetings; on the whole we are not each other’s everyday friends. Yet there exists a commitment to each other and to the life of the group itself which is powerful and which includes an understanding that it will continue.Nan: To have the positive conviction that a communal environment might make possible less anxiety and more variety in human relationships is one thing; to live it out is quite another. For a time it appeared that we as a women’s group, with our kids and our men, would embark on this experiment together. With the disappointing recognition that this was not going to happen began a long period of communal experimentation, for me, with other people (which still continues). It was an absorption which gradually began to cut me off from the others. Ironically, it was the group which had largely spawned my ideas about communal living; but now, when I came with my ‘new’ problems it seemed largely incapable of responding to them as it had toWorkshop Manifesto
those individual problems we all more commonly shared.However, one definition of a creative situation is that it simultaneously provides individuals with enough freedom to be able to take a leap into the unknown, and enough security for them to want to take those risks. The group has fulfilled that function for me. We have all frequently referred to Sally B’s idea that the group has served each one of us as a kind of collective super-ego: could we live up to the ideals of the group conscience from one week to the next? It is, of course, a question which can be asked the other way around too: can the group live up to each of our individual expectations? Happily, for those of us who have stayed with it and in it, the answer to both questions is yes.SR.69, April 1978
WomanwebALISON FELLIn September the women’s liberation movement’s first official national information service will go into operation in Leeds. A bi-monthly newsletter will be available at a cost of £3.00 a quarter to groups and £3.00 a year to individuals. The information centre will answer postal and telephone inquiries from women in the movement and those who don’t yet know about it: on the action groups, resources and campaigns of the movement. The newsletter will publicize events, conferences, provide report-backs and keep up the flow of information and debate between different groups all over the country.In building the women’s movement we have always had to handle a double task - on the one hand we had to work out how to make the movement’s resources public and available to isolated individual women, and on the other, how to keep up the level of communication between existing groups. At different times, one aspect has been more difficult than the other. For instance, when the movement was just beginning and the Women’s Liberation Workshop set up a London office, there were only a few groups to co-ordinate. But daily the workers faced a barrage of phone calls. Inquiries about every aspect of women’s lives, calls for advice and help which came directly from the many needs that women were discovering and starting to voice. It was heart-tearing, frustrating, not having the answers, knowing how much needed to be done, knowing we didn’t yet have the resources.Now, things have changed. There is hardly a single aspect of women’s existence without a study or action group investigating or campaigning around it. So when we at Spare Rib, in the bustle and hurry of producing the magazine, get a call asking what stage the Anti ­ Discrimination Bill has reached in Parliament, or where the best place is to find women’s plays for a Further Education drama class, at least we can rustle through some files, or ask each other ‘Does anyone remember where...?’ Because we know what the Women’s Liberation Workshop office workers of 1970 didn’t - we know that the relevant group or individual who can answer these questions does exist, somewhere. So gathering together the strands into a web of information has become a priority.In 1972 the Leamington group made a brave attempt to set up an information service and newsletter, but this floundered through lack of money and publicity, and indifference - certainly from London groups already kept in contact with each other through the Women’s Liberation Workshop newsletter. Now, once again, the initiative has come from women in the provinces to set up a workable national service, one which will not only solve communication problems for groups outside London, but which we can all benefit from.Because, just as the woman isolated at home, for instance, feels little identity of her own, so we as a movement hardly know who we are. To be able to look around and say with certainty ‘These are my sisters, they are doing this here and that there and in a year we have together won those things’ - this is a great strength. Much of the work of women’s liberation groups - from battling with a local authority for more and better nursery care to setting up women’s therapy groups ­ has been so dispersed as to be invisible to all but those directly involved. All of us need to become acquainted with our achievements and keep ourselves informed about them and begin to assess them. A well-subscribed and supported newsletter would go some way towards this.What women trade unionists are fighting for at work is clearer, less dispersed, and the traditions longer, yet it’s often difficult to see how many struggles are going on nationally, and where support and solidarity could come from. Difficult, also, to see what other women are fighting for outside the workplace, to appreciate and draw strength from the sheer breadth of that fight. How many women struggles at work might receive support from woman’s liberation groups if there was a constant flow of information about them? How many women trade unionists might put their weight behind women’s struggle in the community if they knew about them?Being in the women’s movement may mean that we ‘carry a new world in out hearts’, but the old one has its place in our heads. Faced with practical organizing tasks, we often feel a certain inertia, an inability to take ourselves seriously. It’s hard to remember that that new world has to be organized for concretely if its continuity and durability in a hostile environment is to be assured. The Leeds women responsible for the main work of the Information Service are doing just this, grappling with finance, constitutions, leases, administration, legal safeguards. Strictly limited functions of information and communication have been laid out for the service - it has no power to make policy for the movement. The workers will have their jobs clearly out lined by an office collective, and may be recalled by a monthly meeting which is open to all women’s liberation groups. But all these carefully devised structures are useless unless women follow through in concrete ways the decision they made to give support to the service, unless they send lists of all groups and activities locally, subscribe, publicize the W L M N I S and be ready to send regular news.Organizing against women’s oppression is such a vast affair that sometimes it has that quality found in dreams - a feeling of walking slowly and heavily forward through a swamp. No doubt the mud will be sucking at our feet for a long time yet. But sturdy projects like the Women’s Liberation Movement National Information Service hold the promise of firmer ground for all of us to move on.Subsequently this because the Woman’s Information, Referral and Enquiry Service (WIRES).SR.38, August 1975
Women Together: Edinburgh Sixth National Women’s Liberation ConferenceNORTHERN WOMEN’S LIBERATION ROCK BAND... We had worked quite hard to get things together for Edinburgh; it was to be our debut and we were looking forward to it but we couldn’t have anticipated the experience itself; it was incredible. The power and energy generated at women’s conferences is almost too much. That is why all women’s socials are as important as the workshops - to capture the spirit of the conference.Too often the sexism of popular and progressive music invades and insults the occasion, marring the experience of just being with other women. We felt the need to use music as a force for us to express the new feelings, relationships and attitudes towards each other that we are trying to create in the women’s movement.We collected together and worked on a few songs that had some meaning for us, like Jimmy Cliff’s ‘You can get it if you really want’, as well as some songs that have come out of the movement, like Susan Straightarrow’s ‘Marge’s Song’, and some that members of the group have written themselves. We were trying to develop a sound that was strong but not heavy.Up on stage we felt tentative - it was out first major performance and we were not confident about how things would go down. After the first number we could feel the audience really with us: we were infected by their enthusiasm: together we seemed to create an atmosphere that was electric, indescribable. We felt really happy. The music was no longer merely outs in the group, it was everybody’s and we all wanted it. Looking out over the hall all we could see was a forest of waving hands and the applause and general din was terrific. Energy and enthusiasm seemed to be pouring out of people.How did we feel? We shared that specially elated feeling that we all seemed to get from that social because this time the music was completely created by women; the music was ours, we weren’t dependent on sounds created by men. We also got a lot of satisfaction after all the work we’d put in, knowing that it had all been worthwhile.But the experience was also in some ways bewildering; for the rest of the time we’d just been taking part in the conference like everyone else, anonymous figures milling around and now there we were, part of the social, part of it in a particular way. We could see our friends dancing but we weren’t dancing with them because we were playing. At times it felt as if all the forces generated at the social were focused on us and it was a bit overpowering. Since then, in order to cope with the experience, we have felt the need to assess our relationship as a group to the people for whom we are playing. In the world of pop, performers are idealized as superstars, in turn they look down on and manipulate the audience. Out of the movement we hope that a new type of relationship is developing in which there is no alienation between group and audience. We don’t want to be performers, we are really only women from the movement: the movement has created us and the music we make: we have merely worked on it and play it.SR.27, September 1974        SR. 72 July 1978
Going Back to the BeginningJILL NICHOLLSThe gap between national campaigns, and the way we tend to organize for them, and informal local groups, was a main theme of the seventh National Women’s Liberation Conference in Newcastle on 23-25 April.How can we make national structures reflect local activity? How does out local campaigning reflect our personal and sexual politics? There was talk of ‘reclaiming’ the campaigns into women’s liberation, of expanding the demands and drawing out their implications, of the need to restate constantly and publicly the feminist content of the demands - so that we don’t lose our energy and imagination in an effort to come over as ‘respectable’ and get things done.Must the movement organize differently to be more accessible to new members, especially to working-class women? Is feminism just a question of women struggling together? Do feminist ideas emerge spontaneously when women fight in whatever way to take control of their lives? Or do feminist ideas need to be discovered and developed in consciousness-raising and study groups?The standard split between ‘activism’ and ‘consciousness raising’ was discussed in a new way, with both ‘sides’ seeing both as necessary and inter-related.We reaffirmed the need for an autonomous women’s movement, rooted in the struggle against sexism. We talked of ‘going back to the beginning’, combatting everyday manifestations of sexism in the media, advertising and stripshows.As well as a whole afternoon discussing the direction of the movement, there were dozens of workshops.Women’s burden of housework was discussed in a workshop round a Brighton paper, which suggested we needed a seventh demand and campaign around the sharing of domestic labour and care of dependants. It was agreed that the demand as stated in the paper was too muddled to be proposed at the moment, but that it was certainly a priority to organize publicly about housework in a way which brought out what the women’s liberation movement wants to do about this drudgery - to minimize it by fighting for more socialized facilities, and to raise consciousness about sharing it (rather than to demand wages for it).More work needs to be done on how we fight around this and the childcare demand.A workshop on socialism discussed why the ‘Women and Socialism’ conferences had collapsed in sectarian squabbles. They decided on a new regional structure, dividing the country into eight areas. Each will have a one-day conference soon, on a theme relevant to the area.Information was exchanged about how to set up courses on self-help health and services such as pregnancy testing in the health workshop, which also faced the problem of how much to create alternative structures and how much to put pressure on the N H S to provide what women need.Women met to discuss hospitals - as workers and patients. Someone from Liverpool said that when she was in hospital having her third baby, a younger woman in the ward was having trouble breast-feeding. She went over to help her, showing her how to hold the breast back so the baby could suck the nipple without suffocating. The Sister came in and screamed, ‘How dare you touch another woman’s breast!’After the workshops, the plenary. We decided that International Women’s Day should be organized locally, not from London, and that local groups should decide how to celebrate. We voted to support WIRES, NAC and Women’s Aid, and to hold the next national conference in London.The plenary petered out after confrontation by a group of lesbians who said they’d felt oppressed all weekend by heterosexuals. Other gay women had found the conference very open, and disagreed with that group’s tactics - shouting their anger from the stage.The rushed voting began to seem pointless, and many sisters were setting off home, so we all disbanded.Nearly one and a half thousand registered at the conference. Fifty children were looked after by fifteen men in a creche nearby. We had a whole toy-town to play in - a college campus empty for Easter, but for a rugby team stomping back to base late on Sunday afternoon.All weekend we saw films - including We’re Alive, an amazingly militant film made by women in an American prison, and To the People of the World, with Laura Allende and Carmen Castillo talking about resistance in Chile. We bought books, made posters, made friends. On Saturday night, we danced to the Stepney Sisters, sang to each other. We left feeling stronger, recharged.SR.47, June 1976
Women’s Liberation	1977NEWS ROUND-UPThe National Women’s Liberation Conference is the only time in the year that so many feminists are together and you get a sense of the movement as a whole. For this year’s conference, 2-3 April, we used the City of London Poly. Three thousand women discussed in small groups (workshops), danced to women’s music and on Sunday brought ideas to a mass meeting. Spare Rib ‘interviewed’ some women before they went home and invited everyone there to write down their impressions. Here they are - not comprehensive, but a selection of what we received.. . .N A C - a feminist campaignAngela Phillips (London)As usual there were problems of what to discuss. The majority wanted to consider the relationship between the National Abortion Campaign and the women’s movement and therefore necessarily the difficulties of operating alongside members of left groups. Some others considered such theoretical discussion a waste of time which should have been used discussing action, and a small group of women afterwards expressed annoyance that the discussion hadn’t centred around viability and positive legislation.The discussion did reveal the degree of frustration felt by women’s liberation feminists who are, or have been, organizing around the abortion issue. In spite of attempts to prevent the naming of names, the Socialist Worker Party came in for considerable criticism for their insensitive tactics of flooding small groups, alienating the non-aligned women, engaging in a few rounds of sectarian in-fighting and then disappearing for months leaving the group fractured and often unable to reorganize. Unfortunately no members of the SWP were there to answer this criticism.Feelings were relieved and suggestions aired for a slightly different orientation to the campaign, bringing in the broader aspects of the slogan ‘A Woman’s Right to Choose’ and engaging in more imaginative direct action rather than the perennial demonstrations and meetings. The relatively small size of the workshop was perhaps the biggest indication of the movement’s reluctance to engage seriously in the abortion campaign at present. We can only hope that the mass meeting’s vote to support the demonstration against the Benyon Bill will prove to be an expression of concrete support rather than a meaningless raising of hands.. . .Revolutionary feminism Sheila Jeffreys (London)I asked to have a workshop entitled ‘The Need for Revolutionary Feminism - against the liberal takeover of the women’s liberation movement’, as a result of my growing feeling of alienation and isolation within the movement. I had been unable to discover a political feminism. There was sex-rolism, lifestylism, and socialist feminism. I was in a desperate search for radical feminist theory which talked of the power of men and how to take it from them. Politics was taken to mean socialism, and theory the extension of Marxism. I was terrified lest I grew to hate my sisters because of the frustration and anger I felt at so many meetings, workshops and conferences where no one spoke of power, but of campaigns or sexuality or structure, etc. I could not imagine that I was the first or only person saying these things, and I felt that I daren’t write them down because they must already be written somewhere, but I couldn’t find them. So eventually I had to do it myself.I expected twelve to fifty women to come to the workshop and had no idea whether they would come to criticize or support, and I was very nervous. About two hundred women came and were tremendously supportive and enthusiastic. I was not only not alone but had struck gold.... . .AgeAnna Briggs (North Tyneside Coast Women’s Group)‘Sister, you too will grow old, learn to love it!’This was one of the messages from the workshops on older women’s issues. Fifty women attended, most armed with a conference paper on ‘ageism’ in society - the sexual and financial position of older women, and the fact that ‘community care’ means women, especially older women, looking after dependent relatives.This is what emerged:Older women often have more conditioning to unlearn and it’s difficult to ‘pull the rug’ from under them after years of rationalizing their oppression, or kidding themselves they are personally liberated.Do ‘older’ women need separate consciousness-raising groups as their problems are different, or should women of all ages give each other mutual support?Male colleagues find success in older women very threatening.Widowhood is a traumatic time when people could benefit from positive feminist support.Will the movement ‘grow older’ or will older women leave and be replaced?We talked of the problems older women face, wanting to urge younger women to look at their own attitudes to age and to reassess their campaigns, demanding daycare for dependent relatives as well as nurseries. And we talked of the identity of women as they grow older, particularly centering round the failure of mother/daughter relationships: could mothers and daughters join the same group? How did a mother’s illness or death affect the daughter’s self-perception?Women there from the south-cast decided to convene meetings. Other women will keep in touch by newsletter, and hope to develop the issue in Spare Rib, etc.A woman from Leicester Women’s LiberationI went to the older women’s group - it really brought home to me the problems of forty to fifty-year-old women coming into Women’s Liberation, how they feel excluded: Jam Today, for instance, is great, but it’s rock and not all women want that kind of thing. In a way older women are the pioneers for us later.I’ve lost a lot of energy lately, I’ve been in the movement four or five years. The same things are coming up all the time, and they’re important every time but I’ve lost energy to discuss them. This was the only issue that sparked off new thought for me, something new to work on.I’ve just moved to Leicester from Leeds. I was surprised how many women I knew, who’ve been really strong in the movement, haven’t come. It’s not just that they couldn’t make it this week - it’s not important to them any more.. . .ClassWorking Class Women’s Liberation Group (London)Many working-class women realize that through our contact with the women’s liberation movement we have access to new skills, ideas, etc. We see this as positive; a good education, however you define it, should be available to all of us. But as soon as we begin to use the facilities of the women’s liberation movement we are told we are middle class. This makes us invisible and allows the middle-class women, who dominate the movement, to go on saying that we’re all middle class. It’s a way of keeping power. Also middle-class women expect us to adopt their ‘culture’, before we can use those facilities. We object to the assumption that everything middle class is better than everything working class. That perpetuates the male class system within the movement.Middle-class women must begin to understand and criticize their own attitudes and standards.In our workshops on classism there were working-class women from all over Britain, and of all ages, with different kinds of education. A lot of us talked about the confusion of being in a movement that has tried to cut us off, perhaps unconsciously, from our backgrounds and our experience. We want classism talked about - but we don’t only want talk, we want change.Three women, two in Big Flame (Liverpool)Vera: I’ve never been to one of these in my life - just to see so many women together is great. It’s broadened my mind. I live on an estate on the outskirts of town - I’d come again. You feel like you’ve got someone behind you when you see this - I’ve just started living alone with my kids and I don’t feel so lost any more.I got that drunk last night, it was more excitement really. It’s not like when you go down the pub with all the fellas staring – I felt really relaxed. It’s brought me out a bit- I used to freeze when anyone talked to me.Agnes: Three of the workshops I went to were around working-class issues. I feel women’s liberation is progressing, it’s getting broader, people are willing to talk about class now too.Jill: The ‘How dare you assume I’m middle class’ workshop was supposed to be for working-class women only, but it didn’t really go into problems of being working class without an education. It was mainly women who’ve had middle-class education but working-class backgrounds and don’t know where they are now. I was a bit upset by that, I didn’t really feel I could join in.Vera: One girl got upset because she didn’t know what class she was and someone said: ‘that’s your problem’ and she ran out.Agnes: I think women in the women’s movement are feeling a bit stagnant and want to break out.Vera: I was shitting myself before I came, looking for all kinds of excuses. But now I’d love to see more women from my street come. Some of them got scared of me because I was going round with the Big Flame girls - they thought I had all the answers.Jill: It’s not a question of what’s the best way to get ‘ideas’ across to working-class women like some people here think - it’s not that we’re ignorant or stupid, all we need on say abortion are facts.SR.58, May 1977
Consciousness Raising: Back to BasicsGILL PHILPOTT DESCRIBES HER EXPERIENCEIn the early days of the women’s liberation movement, groups were consciousness-raising groups, though they didn’t always call themselves that. Small groups of women met regularly to talk about their personal experiences as well as take other forms of action. As the movement grew, a split developed between ‘campaigns’ and consciousness raising - between those who felt they should be doing things ‘out there’, and those who thought it was essential to talk together as women. The phrase ‘consciousness raising’ itself has come to be thrown around without anyone stopping to explain what they mean by it - or how you go about it....Are consciousness-raising groups still important for the women’s liberation movement? Is it possible to be in a group with women who are very different from you? Is CR something you do when you’re new to feminism, but that you grow out of? Is it necessary to be in a group at all to raise your consciousness? I went into a consciousness-raising group expecting to sort something out about myself, and came out instead questioning everything. None of us had been in a CR group before and our opinions on what we were supposed to be doing varied widely. Some wanted intellectual stimulation and looked forward to discussing articles, whilst others did not really know why they were there, except that they wanted to talk about themselves. We held a meeting on ‘Why I feel I need a CR group’, and talked about ourselves and experiences that had led us to join. I explained that recently I had found it more and more irritating to be with men I knew, and had worried that the difficulties were in myself, in not being able to take a joke, being too serious, easily upset, touchy - I found myself half believing the remarks the men made with such simplicity and case. However, I had grown very close to another woman who also disliked these comments; we joined the group in need of support, hoping to find other women who were also unhappy with the explanations, and were looking for alternative ones.It had not been comfortable for any of us to talk so personally, but we agreed to continue. Over the following weeks we acknowledged many important parts of ourselves and our lives as women. We spoke of our families, childhood, friends, colleagues, lovers, our painful experiences fears, secrets and happy times, our future dreams and plans ... all of which sparked off talk on many other subjects. We were continually surprised, encouraged, and excited by the similarity of our experiences and as this sharing went on many of us found the confidence to do things that really mattered to us, however trivial. We were able to make important personal changes, in both self-image and lifestyle; decisions we had previously avoided or ignored. Through consciousness raising there is the realization that you are no longer alone. What you are voicing is no longer anger at yourself and what you took to be personal failings, but rather at a society which continues to oppress us all as women in it.Of course, CR doesn’t just happen. It’s something you have to work at. Not all groups work. The one I was part of did. Primarily, I believe, because we did all think it important - we weren’t ashamed of being serious about it, even to the extent of having fixed issues for discussion, especially during our first few meetings. We never abandoned the idea of writing down general points that were made in the group. We had fun, too, and sometimes went out together or supplemented the group with donations of food and drink. Looking back, though, the most amazing outcome was that we didn’t stop at coming to know one another and helping each other to make changes. We felt we owed something to all women, and so our group would regularly be responsible for producing the local newsletter and would be invited to meet with other groups to feed back information, and more importantly, to offer help to new women in search of a group. This all seemed to work because the city we lived in was fairly small, with only one women’s centre, which helped co-ordinate all the CR groups. New women wishing to form or join groups had a specific place to go to where contacts could quickly be made.I don’t know how far CR can go in bringing all women together regardless of say, age, colour or class. For instance, in my group we were roughly the same age, all white, all had higher education and similar work situations. However, we were not all feminists, or married, or mothers, or lesbians. C R surely should be a way of releasing us, not tying us to such labels.CR does not mean an end to women being oppressed. It’s simply the beginning. It does bring an awareness of political as well as of our personal situations. And that kind of knowledge leads to challenge, not compliance.SR.92, March 1980
Why Socialist Feminism? Gatherings in Paris and AmsterdamMICHAEL ANN MULLENTwo socialist feminist conferences were held in Europe recently - one of about 4,000 women at Vincennes University in Paris on 28-30 May [1977], the other of 250 in the ‘Vrouwenhuis’ (women’s house) in Amsterdam on 3-5 June.‘Socialism is a pre-condition for women’s liberation... Socialism though is not a guarantee for women’s liberation’ (Feminist Socialist Platform in the Netherlands).Women have arrived at a socialist feminist perspective from two different directions. There are those who began to become politically aware through their involvement in the women’s movement, and have been led to identify the growing pressures on women with the capitalist society in which we live. And there are those who were first aware of capitalist exploitation and later of their oppression as women, through involvement in the women’s movement.Few feminists who, over the last five years, have sought socialist/revolutionary groups to work with have found one with a theory and practice which deals adequately with the specific oppression of women in the patriarchal tradition of which capitalism is one expression.Many women whose first involvement was with left groups have also become aware of these limitations. For traditional socialist groups have a theory and practice which deals with capitalism only. They continue to operate within a patriarchal tradition. Feminist socialists are groping towards a theory and practice which deal with both patriarchy and capitalism.In December 1975 a group of French women sent an appeal for an international gathering of women trying to come to grips with these problems. At the first two planning meetings there were no major disagreements, but at the third, in London in October 1976, differences in emphasis manifested themselves, because a wider range of political tendencies was represented.We need to understand the differences if the evolution of Socialist Feminism is not to be weakened by fragmentation.The split seems to have taken place over two specific issues. The first was whether the women’s struggle should be viewed as within or alongside the class struggle. The second was whether discussion at the proposed conference should centre around Women and Work or be more broadly based and include issues like sexuality, abortion, the position of women in the home, in the community...It is unfortunate that these issues led to the calling of two separate conferences. They could have been better considered at the international conference itself...SR.61, August 1977
Germany: Reclaiming the NightNEWS FEATUREOn the night of 30 April, women demonstrated in towns all over West Germany against being barred from the streets at night against the way we’re hassled, abused and raped. In most towns the procession went through the bleak area round the station, past men’s nightclubs, pubs and sex shops. In Berlin the route we’d planned was too short for us - we ran on down the Ku-Damm, the main street, pushing the police before us.Some women had painted themselves and were ‘armed’ with flour bags, water pistols, spray cans and dyes; they’d brought along saucepan lids, drums, pipes and bangers to make a noise. We didn’t want a funeral march - we wanted fun, strength and solidarity.When women then looned around in circles doing May dances, raced, screeched, shouted for joy in city squares otherwise commanded only by cars, I felt funny about it. I preferred the full-blooded, aggressive shouts, loaded with our fear and rage, though these too always ended in laughter. We literally made an uproar.I thought of processions to drive out evil spirits, I heard the all too seldom expressed cries of fear and experienced this ‘disturbance of the peace’ as a conscious attack. Yet our protest remained ‘feminine’. Women scream, men hit out. In Frankfurt a woman was badly injured. A man had thrown flower-pots down on the demonstrators.In Hanau women were beaten up. When men hurled abuse at them, they’d tried to talk with them (!). The men’s answer: blows and insults. In Cologne a woman was so badly beaten she had to go to hospital. In Berlin there were men who simply couldn’t understand that our demonstration wasn’t the place for them. They wanted to be in solidarity ­ such solidarity that when Brigitte G. pushed one out he broke her fingers.If women were attacked by men, the whole procession stopped - a few blokes were thumped and cuffed, had flour poured over them, were sprinkled with lemonade, coloured with dye and scared with bangers. Sex shops were sprayed with women’s symbols and sexist posters ripped off walls. We all had plenty to do and felt strong - as long as we stuck together. Speeches, songs, colours, recitations, the light of torches, shouts: against contempt, brutality and male violence, which we still don’t know how to resist when things get serious.From Courage.SR.61, August 1977
Black Women TogetherORGANIZATION OF WOMEN OF AFRO-CARIBBEAN AND ASIAN DESCENTFor us Black women, the National Black Women’s Conference held in Brixton, London, on 18 March this year was an historic occasion. For the first time nearly 300 Black women got together from places as far apart as Birmingham, Brighton, Bristol, Coventry, Leeds, London, Manchester and Sheffield, to discuss some of the many issues which concern us because we are Black, female, working class or all three.... The conference marks an important stage in the development of an autonomous Black Women’s Movement in Britain. It was a living witness to our conviction that, if the voice of Black women in this country is to be heard, we need to set up a separate and independent organization of Black women in which we ourselves lead a struggle against the specific type of oppression that we face. For too long the fact that as Black women we suffer triple oppression has been ignored - by male-dominated Black groups; by white-dominated women’s groups; and by middle-class-dominated left groups. This continual lack of interest in the situation of Black women created a vicious circle, so that many of us who wanted to speak out were reluctant to do so. But by contacting each other, and working together, we have now broken this circle.Moreover, the fact that the conference took place testifies to our belief that our common experience as second-class citizens in contemporary Britain, as well as our joint history as victims of colonialism and imperialism, represents a bond between us which far outweighs ethnic and cultural differences which may exist...SR.87, October 1979
We Will Walk without FearLEEDS RECLAIM THE NIGHT GROUP‘I never dared go out alone after dark. When I saw the leaflet about the night demo I knew I had to go but I was so scared. I was even sick before going out but I did and it really changed how I felt. I’m not alone. I know that now. It’s wonderful.’       Alison Fell, SR.16, October 1973Women unite, reclaim the night! 130 Leeds women congregating in City Square, torchlit figures shouting in the windy darkness, and suddenly we’re in a big circle holding hands. Voices hoarse from singing rise again in memory of the walk down to town from Woodhouse, where rapists lurk on the moor, or Chapeltown, Ripper ‘77 territory. Strong, knowing out sisters all over Britain are marching tonight too.City Square is a wild spontaneous women’s takeover, singing, dancing, a speech - ‘We’ve got this space but it’s not enough. What are we going to do to take more?’MANCHESTER: MARION BOWMANOver the Pennines about 400 women had turned out, marching in from their local areas. ‘We wanted to show that it’s not just the city centre where women are attacked, it’s in the local streets that you live on,’ said Lesley Merryfinch.The planning group in Manchester decided not to contact the police beforehand. In their leaflet they said, ‘The police attitude is “Stay at home’’ which means we’re imprisoned in our homes to avoid attacks, while the men who might attack us can walk around freely. We want to say we’ve had enough of male violence and male justifications for it. We’re walking together tonight in the streets because we’ve got a right to be here. It’s men’s violence that’s got to stop. We agree that men’s attitudes won’t change overnight, but at least we’re showing that we’re no longer content to accept this situation and we’re angry about it.’On the night the police turned up at the meeting points, but after some discussion agreed to put policewomen on the escort. ‘They did show some tact,’ said Lesley.We met in Piccadilly Gardens and stood under the statue of Queen Victoria, some women speaking out about why we were marching: ‘People try to pin attacks on sex fiends. But it’s not just that, it’s the ordinary man in the street.’It was the night before Armistice Sunday. We stood in silence for two minutes in remembrance of all women who’ve suffered at the hands of men, then went on our way to the new women’s centre singing ‘The Women’s Army is marching, O, Sisters, don’t you weep.’LONDON: PAT MOANThis is the best high-flying demo I’ve EVER been on! Hundreds of women wailing and dancing through the streets of Soho. ‘Sexist crap, sexist crap, SEXIST CRAP!’ startling bystanders.The manager of The Pussy Parlour tight-jawed, face flesh quivering as he scrapes stickers off his windows. ‘What does this mean?’ he hisses at me as I take his picture. ‘Can’t you read?’ I say. THIS DEGRADES WOMEN, THIS EXPLOITS WOMEN.One woman is running ahead squirting windows with water, followed by others	lapping stickers on with such exuberant violence you think the windows must break, and hope they will.A man steps out of fluorescent-lit doorway and gets his chest squirted then slapped with a sticker.Not like any other march. No stewards, cowed by police, cajoling people to keep the ranks. No. We are all over. Humming, buzzing, shouting. A real woman’s march - a rampage. Surging, droning, chanting. Women Fight Rape.Yes means yesNo means noHowever we dressWherever we go.Flame-lit faces of people who have found that spirit to fight a mammoth war. One woman stops another to get a light for her torch. A young black man comes over, blows out the torch and turns to run off to his smirking mares. She belts him over the back with it and it reignites, burning a hole in his jacket. Women’s laughter in the torch ­ light. Men looking at the jacket under the streetlight.It is a measure of how confident men feel of their unconditional right to abuse women that so many of them step into our group and smugly insult individual women. Sometimes other women rally round in defence and the men wander off.One delightful woman has a bag of maggots for sprinkling on the offending males.It is so fluid this ‘march’ - very fast at times, running around, at, over cars, stopping traffic. I think police are not used to running. They come along behind ripping down stickers, muttering comfortingly into radios - little gestures, by stiff spectators.Around the event, before and after, there are objections: that it should have been held locally, not in Soho, that it might be confused with a Mary Whitehouse-type campaign, an ex-prostitute told me she didn’t agree with it because she thought it would be bad for the business of the prostitutes in Soho. I’m sure there were more that I didn’t hear. But this event isn’t the be-all and the end-all, the definitive perfect demonstration. It should be a starting point, an inspiration, a learning experience, a step forward. It does not preclude other actions. Women’s liberation is about supporting other women. Let’s do it.Whatever politicking went on to do with the organization of it (and I wasn’t in on it) it was a blow-out to be there. It was wild. There. There, where normally we walk silently, stewing inside, keeping our disgust to ourselves. It was exhilarating just to MOVE, express our feelings, instead of the eyes-down-look-like-you’re-going-somewhere walk, the woman-alone walk. We ran and jumped, and argued and stretched ourselves.At the end we meet in Leicester Square. And all the piggy men. I sense a sporting violence from them.‘Wot you doin’ ‘ere? You ain’t even ugly.’ (This man got bopped in the face.)‘I should come here to pick up my chicks.’ (A denim-clad slickster.) Horrible, slimy men.May the day come when sex-shop owners and strip-club owners can’t buy insurance, are afraid to do business for fear of their plate glass being smashed, for fear of their plushy interiors being messed up, for fear of their own crummy lives. I saw fear in the eyes of those traffickers. They are afraid of our rage. They should be.LANCASTER: LANCASTER WOMEN’S LIBERATION NEWSLETTERWe met in the Women’s Centre and left in procession, twenty-seven of us, at 11 p.m. We started out slightly hysterical, giggling our way along but we calmed down fast enough when we started getting abuse from men.The centre of Lancaster seemed to be crawling with police... It was very noticeable that in the areas immediately outside the centre, in the places where women are most likely to have trouble, there were no police present at all.The best thing was the constant warmth and support we got from other women. There was no arguing about us being ‘extreme’ or ‘crazy’ or ‘anti-men’. They knew exactly what we were shouting about and shouted their support back. These contacts made all the wind and the wet worth it.       BRIGHTONWomen walked all over the town, giving out leaflets, banging saucepan lids, blowing whistles and singing. Many wore white make-up or had women’s signs painted on their checks.       BRISTOLThe police were very unwilling to let the women march through the city-centre, so there was a silent torch-lit procession through dark residential areas, where there have been several sexual assaults. ‘It was too cold to wear anything fancy! But we had lots of placards, and the Bristol Women’s Liberation Group banner in front.’       YORKAbout eighty women sang and danced round York, and had a party afterwards. ‘It was amazing to be able to walk through the streets singing at the top of your voice, but we needed more songs to sing!’       NEWCASTLEA hundred women turned up equipped with homemade torches, and the demonstration ended with an impromptu party and meeting.       How did it all start?Leeds women formed a Reclaim the Night Group after reading the report of the night demos in Germany (SR.61) and discussing action against male violence at the ‘Revolutionary Feminist’ conference in Edinburgh in July. ‘We were particularly concerned because there’d been a series of women murdered in West Yorkshire,’ they explained. ‘There’d been a need for a new area of action radical enough to really fire people.’They decided to fix a date for a march which they published in WIRES, the National Women’s Liberation Newsletter. They also sent letters to women’s centres and publications calling for support. The idea caught on.Locally they distributed 1,700 leaflets in offices, factories, hospitals, shopping centres and pubs. ‘Just doing that was in itself consciousness raising,’ said Magda Yates They co-ordinated national publicity, spending a lot of time and money contacting the national press (who gave some coverage) and the BBC (who weren’t interested). They did manage to get on local radio to explain what they were doing...SR.66, January 1978 
Finding Each Other at SchoolNAOMI, PETRA, JANE, JULIE, RACHEL, KATE, JANE, LUCY, NICOLEOurs is a large mixed comprehensive school with quite a big sixth form. There’s been a woman’s group here for three years, though of course with people leaving and new ones coming into the sixth form, it restarts every year.... We decided to start off with a few consciousness-raising meetings, closed to boys, to exchange experiences. For example, a Greek girl told us about her problems over wanting to have a boyfriend, and how she was being made unhappy by her family’s restrictions.... One of the real problems with school groups is getting somewhere regular and comfortable to meet. Your life is governed by rules, bells, timetables, and generally uncomfortable conditions. In an average comprehensive school, younger students are particularly discriminated against in this way. They are virtually locked out of rooms except for lesson times, and have nowhere to go except crowded, cold, noisy places, or just to wander around. As sixth formers, we are privileged. We’ve been given a special building and made an elite. We’re lucky ­ but this effectively cuts us off from the rest of the students, and we are sure that there are many girls like us, only a bit younger, who’d like to come to meetings.... We’ve also discussed quite a lot whether teachers should be in the group, and on the whole we think not. However friendly teachers are, however supportive, however similar in their politics, in the end they remain a teacher, and in any discussion they have power over you whether or not they use it. You can never be absolutely sure they won’t say things later in the staff room. They also basically have more power than us to push their views, even though these are built on greater experience. We think it’s best for women teachers to form their own groups, and for us to have ours, and of course for the groups to meet and work together....We realize we are lucky to have this relative freedom - a fairly relaxed school, with several feminist teachers and many special sixth-form privileges. But basically we are still very restricted-everything to do with our meetings has to be checked out first, and even the contents of this article have to go through the headmistress before it can be published. There’s really no school with girls and women in it which doesn’t need a women’s group. When you find each other it’s such a relief.SR.95, June 1980 
‘We are All Criminals’: Women’s Liberation in SpainANITA BENNETT AND JILL NICHOLLS‘We are all adulteresses’ read the placards on the largest women’s liberation demonstration in Spain ever. By their hundreds women took to the streets - in Barcelona, Zaragosa, Madrid, Valencia, Seville - to protest the charge of adultery against Maria Angela Munoz. Her husband, Ramon Soto, went to the judge to gain custody of their small child, Yolanda, whom he had abandoned two months after her birth. ‘A Father Who Wants His Daughter Back’ read the male-dominated press. A father supported in his claim by the Spanish state and the Church. In Spain, as elsewhere, women are property, mere breeders of children. Under the Penal Code women can be prosecuted for adultery, for any sexual relations outside marriage. Men can be charged only when they have it off within the four walls of the matrimonial home. And few would be so foolish as to pursue their affairs (asuntos) at home.Spanish prisons are full of women incarcerated for ‘crimes’ such as prostitution and abortion. In fact, one half of the women now in prison are said to be charged with either having had or performed an illegal abortion. The Pope still feels it his duty to define for women everywhere the meaning of the ‘right to life’, and the Church in Spain wields considerable influence.While thousands demonstrate for the release of all political prisoners, for a total amnesty, the burgeoning women’s liberation movement is demanding that their sisters too be recognized as political prisoners. One of the most famous women prisoners in Spain, psychoanalyst and author Eva Forest, has recently been released from the women’s prison of Yeserias where she was held more than two years without trial and subjected to brutal sexual torture. Lidia Falcon, a feminist lawyer from Barcelona, was arrested with her friend Eva but released in the summer of 1975. The publicity given to Eva’s case by the international women’s liberation movement was instrumental in her release as well as in the lessening of her torture. The international movement has also contributed considerably to the growth of feminist consciousness inside Spain.Women were active in Spanish politics long before the women’s movement, but they are only now beginning to organize autonomously, around their own issues. For example, the Communist Party’s Association Democratica de Mujeres in Madrid has worked since 1970       SR.69, April 1978for the release of their (mainly male) relatives and friends. They have demonstrated, petitioned, published underground bulletins. However, Lidia Falcon, concerned for the forgotten female prisoners, criticized the Association’s food march at Christmas 1975. ‘They brought food and placards to the men’s prison of Carabanchel, the best known. But they forgot the women political prisoners sitting in Yeserias. No one cares about the women, they’re not considered to be “political”! Yet some of the women in Yeserias with me were charged with “terrorism”. Some had tiny children, no exercise, fewer visits. In the Barcelona women’s prison the situation is even worse because the place is run by repressed nuns. ‘ The male tortures inside the prisons cannot be totally divorced from the men outside. Brutality, sex warfare is waged against every woman who walks the streets. The degree of oppression often depends on the class into which a woman is born. A friend from a village in Andalucia once said, ‘I remember when one of the women in the village committed adultery. She was paraded through the village and stoned by all the villagers.’The sexism is deep-rooted. But the most encouraging sign for change is the feminist movement - which has exploded on the scene since the death of Franco in 1975. Before that, any oppositional organization was underground. Even over the last year and a half the movement has been semi-clandestine. In May/June 1976, 4,000 women gathered for four days in Barcelona for the first national feminist conference, the first public meeting of any kind since Franco’s death. Here they gave further impetus to an independent women’s movement and elaborated some basic demands -on pay abortion, contraception.Some feminist groups want to be legalized, especially those involved with specific campaigns; the Barcelona divorce groups were legalized on 19 May. The radical feminist groups feel their goal goes beyond legalization; they don’t feel they could integrate their fight with the ‘democracy’ available in Spain. If a group is not legitimized, its meetings can be forbidden - ‘But we go ahead anyway, and don’t ask for permission.’Perhaps because women have been so oppressed for the last forty years, their movement arrives with a greater force and seriousness than in any other European country. ‘Feminist’ is becoming a household word: magazines, newspapers, television and, yes, even men, pay lip service to the women’s movement.In Palma de Majorca, the newly formed women’s groups have both a news column in the island’s major newspaper and their own weekly radio programme. ‘It consists partly of news reports and partly of interviews,’ explained Leonor Taboada, one of the group. ‘For instance women talk about their sexual lives from the very beginning - how they lost their virginity, what kind of orgasm they feel. One woman talked about getting an orgasm at last by going off with another man after being married eight years. The radio station turned the sound down very low - so we wrote it up in the newspaper instead!’Women of all ages and classes have begun to approach the feminists - they are sick of being treated like cattle. Leonor said with great glee that she and another sister were driving along the main strip on the waterfront when some men accosted them: ‘I started honking the horn, telling them to go home and teach their fathers to drive a car, to go cover their cocks. They were so surprised they didn’t know what to do at first, then they got really angry and starred to chase us.‘Things are moving fast in Majorca,’ she added, ‘though we have a lot of trouble with the Left. We had a conference on women and our bodies in Palma on 6 May, and wouldn’t let men in because we were showing how to use speculums [instruments for spreading the vaginal walls while examining the cervix]. The men were fighting women outside because they couldn’t come in. Many women bought speculums and were rushing round the main square that night clacking their speculums!’One of the most active tendencies in the movement is the Colectivo; founded in Barcelona by Lidia Falcon, it now has nationwide coordination, with occasional conferences to work out their line. Although their membership is small, the impact of their ideas has helped shape the new movement. Lidia and a couple of other women from the Colectivo work on Vindicacion Feminista, a monthly magazine with a circulation of about 30,000. It is not the official journal of the Colectivo, who as a whole don’t feel represented by it.Past experience coupled with the present political practice of left groups has convinced many women of the need for a specifically feminist revolution. They, like radical feminists in other countries, view women as a distinct social class and see men as the primary oppressors of women. Most of the women in the Colectivo have been Marxists of one sort or another (Lidia was in the Spanish Communist Party - PCE). However, they now view Marxism as totally incapable of bringing about the liberation of women. They concentrate very much on theory, holding small group discussions and writing.Their experiences in Leninist-type parties, however distorted, have led them to function rather like one themselves. Because they think women constitute a class which must overthrow the patriarchy, they want their own feminist, democratic centralist party. Women who belong to other political parties are not permitted to maintain doble militancia (double militancy), that is, dual membership of the Colectivo and another organization, on the grounds that it wouldn’t be clear where their ‘real’ loyalties lay - to women or to the men in their left groups. They can have ‘double militancy’ for a trial period, but then have to choose.One must be elected into a Colective. From this and their dogmatic line many problems have arisen. Recently Lidia Falcon, her daughter Regina and Any Estany, who all help publish Vindicacion, were expelled from the Barcelona Colectivo. This feud was instantly lapped up by the press, anxious to discredit the movement. Others in the group accused these three of being ‘elitist, egotistical, dictatorial’. The Colectivo criticised them on twenty points: one concerned an article which Lidia had published on domestic labour, roughly corresponding to the Wages for Housework position - should she have signed it personally or credited it to the Colective? Was it the ‘correct line’?A difference in strategy as to how to approach the national elections on 15 June, the first held in Spain for forty years, caused further divisions in the national Colectivo network, and in other sections of the women’s movement. Lidia believes that women should boycott the elections since participation means acceptance of the ‘democratic farce’ and de facto recognition of the monarchy. She argues that ‘Women have more to gain from the Republican form of government. Under the Republic, women could vote, own property, have abortions.’ Women in Catalonia today want to get similar benefits to those they had during the Republic. But some of the Colectivo want to put up feminist candidates in the elections. There’s also conflict within the movement as to whether or not to vote, and whether to give support to left-wing parties.Nationally, the women’s movement I held together by a co-ordinating body, the Coordinadora Estatal. Locally, there are co-ordinating networks such as the Coordinadora de Barcelona, which has representatives from a number of women’s, trade union and neighbourhood organizations. Rosa Franquet, invited by the National Abortion Campaign to the 14 May demonstration against Benyon’s Bill, is an active member of the Sants neighbourhood women’s group- a Vocalia de Mujeres. During the Franco dictatorship, these neighbourhood committees worked for local reforms, such as better street lights. (Regina Falcon once accused these women of ‘having street lights instead of vaginas’.) Now the neighbourhood groups are becoming more radicalized and feminist, attracting women in left groups and trade unions, and local women who’ve had no previous contact with the women’s movement.There are too many groups to list - some that have split from the Colectivo, like a lesbian group to Valencia, and the Majorca group ‘Pelvis’ who objected to the Colectivo’s hard line; and others, like ANCHE in Barcelona once an open group of about 150 socialist feminists, now split into radical feminists and those on the left. The movement’s main concerns are broad political issues and health; groups are always to flux, and will be even more so after the 15 June elections.Theoretical differences between the groups have very practical consequences. Rosa Franquet, for example, argues for the necessity of a single issue campaign on abortion and contraception. Both are illegal; women with money can get abortions in London, but poorer women have to find other ways. In one recent case a teenage girl, aided by her boyfriend, sought an illegal abortion on the resort island of Ibiza. The female abortionist is reported to have injected hot beer into the woman’s uterus, provoking a severe haemorrhage. When the girl and her boyfriend sought medical advice, they were turned away for lack of money (15,000 pesetas or £125). The girl died four days later. Her boyfriend, the abortionist and even her small child remain in prison for conspiring to abort. Feminists protested, and now the doctor who refused to give treatment is on trial for malpractice.Given this atrocious situation, for some the priority is to change the law. A group in Madrid for example is working for legal contraceptive clinics. Women in political parties are trying to get their organizations to take up the fight for contraception and abortion - abortion is obviously the more controversial.The radical feminists tend to leave the hard grind of campaigning for legal change to the ‘reformists’. A self-help collective in Barcelona tries to spread ‘counter-information’- they assume that contraceptive clinics will come, and want to make sure that women have the right kind of contraception. They do realize that abortion on demand won’t come so easily.The Colectivo argue that sex with men is always an act of aggression, and unnecessary because women can have orgasms without penetration. They agree in theory with a woman’s right to choose, but put no energy into building a campaign involving all women against the abortion laws.In Barcelona there have been large meetings on the right to divorce, which does not exist under the present civil law The Communist and Socialist parties, and those to their left, tend to at least mention this issue in their election propaganda. ‘This is hardly surprising,’ Rosa Franquet explained; ‘It is very likely that the government is going to have to give in on divorce, since many of the progres [trendies] are campaigning for it. It is an important issue, but not as central as abortion and contraception.’The radical feminists are against marriage and the family, so for them divorce is only part of the problem. ‘We have to support the campaign for divorce,’ says Leonor, ‘but we are trying to open women’s minds about what it means to be married.’Splits in the women’s liberation movement showed clearly this year on May Day, which happened to coincide with Mother’s Day. May Day, a traditional international trade union celebration, was particularly significant in Spain this year. In Madrid and in the Basque country (Euzkadi), demonstrations were brutally repressed by the police. Some feminists in Barcelona argued for joining the main trade union demonstration outside the city, as a separate women’s contingent.Others objected, and instead of joining the massive May Day march, women from the Colectivo and from LAMAR (‘the sea’, a very active radical feminist grouping), took up the issue of Mother’s Day. They held a picket outside the ‘Maternidad’ (maternity) hospital, the biggest in Barcelona. In particular they protested the situation of unmarried mothers. In Spain these women are criminals - many are forced to put their children up for adoption. But the children are not even legal human beings. They are ‘illegitimate’ - without a father they are quite literally not recognized by Church and state. Without a man, a woman is ‘illegitimate’ - that is what the feminists are challenging.SR 60, July 1977       From ‘Lotta Continua’, SR.51, October 1976 
Decades: Talking across the CenturyGAIL LEWIS AT THIRTY TALKED WITH CAROLE SPEDDINGHow did you first become interested in feminism?Well, I first got involved in the women’s movement in about 1974 after having been active in other political campaigns and thinking about feminism a lot. Then, after a while, I met a group of white women with whom I became friends and we started working together, politically. It was a very close and supportive time for me. But then, after the high of all this had worn off, I started to understand that the specifics of my life, as a Black woman, weren’t really being dealt with. That was true on two levels really - the more general level that reflects the differences between Black and white women in Britain, and on a more personal level, the way that those differences can influence your personal relationships. For example, there may be some white women with whom Black lesbians can feel closer in terms of racial aspects because those white women, due to past experiences in their own lives, may be more conscious of the way in which racism affects people on a day-to-day basis.I found that many of the women with whom I had felt close before just couldn’t understand this. At some level they had incorporated the idea prevalent in the women’s movement that feminism made a total, absolute bond between all women.So where did you go from there?In order for me to feel that the issues that affected me were being tackled I then had to join a Black women’s group. This was important because not only did it deal with my personal things, but being involved in a Black women’s group meant that the general issues that affect all Black people in this country, and the development of a Black feminist politics were taking place side by side. This involvement has helped me to crystallize my criticisms of the women’s movement in England ­ and has led me to understand that it is important to make a distinction between feminism and the women’s liberation movement.What do you mean?That it’s important that femisim, which leads us to a greater understanding specially of women’s position but more generally of the workings of capitalism, must then be fed into a socialist analysis. But the women’s movement in this country, by and large, has reflected the white middle-class women’s privileges that are now under threat. For me, it’s important that feminism in England a country that has been made on the backs of Third World countries) challenges the ideology and structures of British imperialism. Only when the women’s movement comes to grips with this will it even be able to begin to address itself to the position of Black women (after all, we are only here because of imperialism in the first place). So unless the women’s movement develops an anti-imperialist perspective, issues like Ireland and racism will never be able to be dealt with.HAZEL HUNKINS HALLINAN AT NINETY TALKED WITH AMANDA SEBESTYENBecoming a feminist was a change to my life, completely when I graduated from college I got a job teaching chemistry at the University of Missouri, and everything was going beautifully when mother got ill, and my brother thought that I being the daughter - ought to come home and take care of her. It was a long hard illness, but she got well; and in the meantime I’d given up my job!I wrote all the summer, 1916, trying to get practical research work. I got a stack of letters that high from firms and corporations, and every single letter said ‘We do not employ women. No reasons at all we don’t; it’s a man’s job. So I taught at the local high school for a while, and it just killed me. I was just about ready to commit suicide! My goal was closed to me and the only things that were open to me were things that I didn’t want to do...Along came a girl to see me. Alice Paul, the leader of the National Women’s Party, had sent her out to Montana to organize the women’s movement there; and she just converted me hook, line and sinker. She asked me to a conference at Colorado Springs, where I got another full-sized dose of what I ought to have known long ago.I’ve been in the women’s movement ever since.I came to England in 1920, just after Lady Rhondda had established the Six Point Group. Lady Rhondda’s idea was ‘We’ve got the vote, now we’ve got to do something with it. But the Six Points were welfare matters, they were not universal freedom clauses. Along to the 1930s we changed the aims to ‘Equality for women politically, occupationally, morally, socially, economically and legally.’My interest today is in what the Equal Opportunities Commission does not touch. Domicile, nationality, immigration, Social Security and taxation. That’s quite a lot. They’re difficult things, and we have a weak Commission. I grant that it’s a difficult period of time, but somehow or other we’ve got to get around it.... I had a considerable fame at one time by backing the women’s liberation movement - nobody else would at the start. Germaine Greer’s book does me proud on the first and second pages, thanking me for backing the movement when it was so unpopular. I thought ­ and I still think - that consciousness raising was a very important part of it. It was something everybody laughed at, but I think it was a good thing.... I haven’t seen a copy of Spare Rib for ages. The last time I saw it, it was much bigger and not as sophisticated. But why, oh why, do you have such small type that old ladies can’t read? You ought to be more strict with your editing...Well, well, well. I really didn’t know Spare Rib had grown up so.SR.100, November 1980
Afterword by the Spare Rib CollectiveAround the time of Spare Rib’s 100th issue - as good a time as any to take stock of what we were doing at the magazine - the collective sat round a table and each of us scribbled down what we thought the aim of our work was. Did we still feel we had a vision beyond the practical details of producing and selling a magazine every month? And if so, did we have a shared vision in spite of all our differences? Going through our notes together, we were struck by the similarity of what each of us had noted down and by the passion with which we’d expressed it.Underlining everything we’d written was the continuing belief that Spare Rib could reach all women - that we wanted it to be challenging in its content yet accessible in its form and available in every newsagent. We had no doubts about it being a women’s liberation magazine, about it being part of the process of women working together for fundamental change. Our emphasis was on making changes from the bottom, not on getting to the top. We wanted Spare Rib to take the women’s liberation movement to women who’d never encountered it, and involve them in it. We also wanted to be exciting and challenging for women already active in the movement.Spare Rib aims to reflect women’s lives in all their diverse situations so that they can recognize themselves in its pages. This is done by making the magazine a vehicle for their writing and their images. Most of all, Spare Rib aims to bring women together and support them in taking control of their lives. If there is one thing that sums up that common vision it is the letter that comes from Shropshire or Swansea or South London: ‘I thought I was the only woman in the world who felt as I did until I read Spare Rib...’That letter arrives all the time. But of course there are problems too. I am trying to stimulate a wide range of readers, do we settle for a blandness that satisfies no one? We’re variously accused of being too lefty/not lefty enough, too man-hating/not man-hating enough, too parochial/too international, or, most commonly of all, too internal to the women’s movement/totally out of touch with feminist debate. However contradictory these criticisms may seem, we often find ourselves agreeing when all of them. Despite our need to produce a magazine which is fulfilling to us, as well as attractive and challenging to readers, we rarely feel totally satisfied. We know how complex the struggle for change has to be, on have many fronts, and over what a long period of time.The sheer volume of work astounds us. Despite the depressing conditions of the recession, the women’s movement is expanding; this means that more and more ideas for articles and guests for information and help arrive at our office every day. We are publishing more about racism, violence against women, and militarism than ever before. As fast as we try to update our coverage on one major area of struggle, another area emerges. More groups of women are demanding the right to speak - Black women, older women, young women, women with disabilities. We’re bursting at the seams and thinking of increasing the pages of the magazine yet again.Whilst absorbing all these changes, we want to support each other in working effectively as a collective - this often means political and practical upheavals to our working day. And yet we still want to find time to be involved in other feminist actions- and fun- outside the magazine. High expectations on low pay!Something like sixty women have worked on the Spare Rib collective since its first issue ten years ago, and many hundreds more have written, drawn, photographed, designed and helped out in the office. In these ten years, the way the magazine looks and the issues it covers have changed in as many ways as the women who make it, on and off the collective, have changed. And with another 100 issues it will be different again. But we think whichever women come together to bring our Spare Rib, and whatever the limitations of the vision we’ve all shared, they will still be saying, this magazine is for women, directed towards changing all our lives.November 1981
IndexNote. Figures in italics indicate an article written by the person named in the index. 
Abortion: Abortion Act 1967, 339, 517; clinics fire-bombed, 368-9; difficulties of getting, prior to 1967 Act, 359-64; in Iran, 535; in Italy, 365-7; to New Zealand, 368; in Northern Ireland, 517; in Spain, 601Abortion Act 1967, 339, 517Action for Lesbian Parents (ALP),98Actresses’ Franchise League, 277,278-80, 282, 283Addams, Jane, 71Ades, Rose, 17, 492-8Advertising: discrimination in, 499; sexism in, 65-9; suffrage posters, 499Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), 65-9Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS), 213 216Affirm, 69African National Congress, 530, 532Against	Rape (Media and Thompson), 475age: false assumptions made about, 61-2, women’s liberation movement and, 583-4agoraphobia, 393-5Ainslie, Rosalynde, 525-34Alcoholics Anonymous (A A), 396,398 400alcoholism, 395-400Allen, Chris, 383Alliance Against Sexual Coercion, 186Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers (AUEW), 207, 209, 224Amnesty International, 525Andre, Carl, 57Anguiscola, Sophonisba, 262, 264, 267Anthony, Susan B., 43, 70, 549-50anti-semitism, 34Anwar Ditta, 503Arrowsmith, Pat, 510Artists’ Suffrage League, 70Arts Council, 56, 59arts, the: the artist as housewife, 272-6; Clapperclaw, 290-91; constructive criticism, 286-8; discrimination to music, 259-60; feminist short stones, 288-9; feminist theatre, 276-83; Gynaecocratia, 297-302; musician, 290-97; patriarchal notions of art, 268-9; poetry, 286; rock music, 295-7; Susan Hiller’s work, 268-72; why have an all-women show? 268; women and art, 259-61; women artists of the past, 262-7; worker writes in Liverpool, 289-90Ashwell, Lena, 283Association for Improvements in the Maternity Services, 387Association of Professional, Executive, Clerical and Computer Staff (APEX), 184, 208, 212, 213, 214, 216Association of Radical Midwives, 381-3Association of Scientific, Technical and Managerial Staffs (ASTMS), 184Astell, Mary, 545, 546AWAZ, 502Ballard, Catherine, 384-93Ballin, Ada, 47Barbach, Lonnie, 322Barker, Jane, 187-8 Barrett, Elizabeth, 260 Bartlett, Scott, 317battered women, 442-50Battersby, Audrey, 565, 567-8, 572Belfrage, Sally, 565Belsize Lane Women’s Group, 561-75Benito, Maria, 482Benoist, Marie-Guilhemine, 262Bennett, Anita, 596-602Benton, Sarah, 103Besant, Annie, 339Betries, Joyce, 169-74Black women: Black feminists and violence against women, 461-3; development of Black women’s movement, 589-90, 603-4; harassment of immigrants, 501-3; prejudice at work, 176, 177; racial violence in school, 457-61; racism linked with sexism, 440; racism to nursing, 201-3; women in South Africa, 525-34Blancour, Marie, 262Bloomer, Amelia, 41-2, 44, 47, 549‘bloomers’, 41-4Bock, Jo, 482Bond, Caroline, 22Bonheur, Rosa, 262, 264-60, 552books ‘for guts’, 34-8Boot and Shoe Operatives Union, 168Bowman, Marion, 591Boychuk, Louise, 225-7Boycott, Rosie, 16, 17, 18Bracey, Dawn, 374-5Brackx, Anny, 225-7Brandt, Judith, 566, 572Brazil, Angela, 35breast cancer, 420-26Brent Women’s Centre, 416-20 British Women’s Temperance Association, 551-3Brook Advisory Centres, 493Brooke, Dinah, 566Broughton, Ada, 559Briggs, Anna, 61, 85, 583Butler, Josephine, 548, 552Byrne, Eileen, 495

More about Penguins and PelicansFor further information about books available fromPenguins please write to Dept EP, Penguin Books Ltd,Harmondsworth, Middlesex UB7 ODA.In the U.S.A.: For a complete list of books available fromPenguins to the United States write to Dept CS, PenguinBooks, 625 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10022.In Canada: For a complete list of books available fromPenguins in Canada write to Penguin Books Canada Ltd,2801 John Street, Markham, Ontario, L3R IB4.In Australia: For a complete list of books available fromPenguins in Australia write to the Marketing Department,Penguin Books Australia Ltd, P.O. Box 257, Ringwood,Victoria 3134.In New Zealand: For a complete list of books available fromPenguins to New Zealand write to the MarketingDepartment, Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, P.O. Box 4019,Auckland 10.
Also published by PenguinsOUTSIDE IN... INSIDE OUTWOMEN’S PSYCHOLOGY:A FEMINIST PSYCHOANALYTIC APPROACHLuise Eichenbaum and Susie OrbachSusie Orbach (author of the world-famous Fat is a Feminist Issue) and Luise Eichenbaum together set up The Women’s Therapy Centre in London. Drawing on their experiences and their work there, the authors propose here a new developmental model of women’s psychology which is different from current and accepted (and usually male-dominated) thinking. From its radical reappraisal of the mother-daughter relationship to its conclusions on gender identity and object theory, Outside In... Inside Out is a stimulating and exciting contribution to the field of women’s studies.THE SCEPTICAL FEMINISTA PHILOSOPHICAL ENQUIRYJanet Radcliffe RichardsJanet Radcliffe Richards’s analysis leads her to considerable criticism of many commonly held feminist views, but from it emerges the outline of a new and more powerful feminism which sacrifices neither rationality nor radicalism.‘Intellectually sober and politically practical, yet gay, witty and dashing at the same time... It’s a model of how to write a book on any topic; on a contentious subject like this it’s a triumph’ - Sunday TimesTHE FEMININE MYSTIQUEBelly FriedanFirst published in the sixties The Feminine Mystique still remains a powerful and illuminating analysis of the position of women in Western society.‘Brilliantly researched, passionately argued book - a time-bomb flung into the Mom-and-Apple-Pie image... Out of the debris of that shattered ideal, the Women’s Liberation Movement was born’ - Anne Leslie
A choice of Penguin FictionFALLING IN PLACEAnn BeattieIt’s a hot, sullen summer on America’s East Coast. As John and Louise Knapp bicker at their weekend marriage, a twelve-year­ old Parker makes another trip to the shrink in New York; as Cynthia the English teacher clings to her freaky lover Spangle - Ann Beattie invades Updike and Cheever territory to give us a cinematic, brilliantly comic view of America’s affluent hell.‘Wonderfully funny’ - The TimesMOTHER’S HELPERMaureen FreelyThe Pyle-Carpenter household comes complete with three children who can do what they like as long as they have Thought It Through, an intercom that never turns off, with Weekly Family Councils and with the television padlocked into a bag. Like Kay Carpenter herself, it was a totally liberated, principled, caring, warm, nurturing nucleus... And at first, Laura was completely fooled.‘A novel to weep over or laugh with. Whichever will stop you going mad’- Literary ReviewDAUGHTERS OF PASSIONJulia O’FaolainAnger, passion, tenderness… nine evocative stories from the author of So Country for Young Man. Julia O’Faolain never falters as she moves through situations both strange and familiar - the seduction of a lonely nanny in Paris, a family embarrassed by an unwelcome guest, the sharply focused memories of an imprisoned hunger-striker under pressure to eat. It is a brilliant, compulsive foray into a landscape of passion from a writer at the height of her powers.Violence		382State		386Women’s Liberation Movement		487		493		495