CENTRE FOR RESEARCH COLLECTIONSEDINBURGH UNIVERSITY LIBRARYGEORGE SQUAREEDINBURGHEH8 9LJTEL: +44 (0)131 650 8379FAX: +44 (0)131 650 2922BOOK-SCANNED 2018SHELF MARK:	N/ATITLE:	Spare Rib ReaderAUTHOR:	Rowe, Marsha; Fell, Alison; Green, VictoriaN.B.	Scanned as single pages.	Blank pages have been omitted.	The binding frequently obscures text in the guttering. 	THIS IS THE BEST COPY AVAILABLE.
Penguin BooksSpare Rib Reader'Spare Rib set out, ten years ago now, to be the magazine that "put women's liberation on the news stands". An early proposal declared: "There is the most urgent need for a magazine that will reach ALL women - that is, women who are frustrated by the limitations of existing magazines. Commercial journalese gives unrealistic solutions to problems, thus increasing loneliness and isolation."'It was to be a forty-eight page news magazine published monthly at fifteen pence. Great emphasis was placed on regular, "professional" production: this was partly in reaction to the unreliability of alternative publications and partly to prove women's capability and efficiency. In July 1972, the first issue went on the news stands - and sold out. In those early days two editors and six women with specific job designations steered the magazine on an exciting and sometimes contradictory course. The magazine ran regular columns on Law, Sex, Health, Work, and the Arts, had a do-it-yourself page called "Spare Parts", offered wholesome recipes, the occasional knitting pattern, and a men's page.'Over the next few years many changes took place. The masthead of Spare Rib 18 announced that the magazine was to become a collective - all jobs and skills would be shared; ''big names" disappeared (along with contributors' payments ) in favour of encouraging many more "ordinary" women to describe their lives in words, illustrations or photos - although people like Jane Fonda continued to provide hard-sell cover material.'Bedevilled by problems of distribution and fluctuating sales, Spare Rib nervously altered its image: having started with the proud logo, "the new women's magazine", it retreated to plain "news magazine", then veered over the next few years between "women's magazine" and "women's news magazine", and then left a description off altogether. With its fourth birthday, it came out at last a "women's liberation magazine".'A decade later and we're still at it. Something like sixty women have worked on the Spare Rib collective since its first issue, and many hundreds more have written, drawn, photographed, designed and helped out in the office. In these ten years, the way the magazine looks and the issues it covers have changed in as many ways as the women who make it, on and off the collective, have changed. And with another hundred issues it will be different again. The Spare Rib Reader offers a glimpse of those first hundred issues and reflects the vision that Spare Rib originally set for itself – to be a magazine for all women, directed towards changing all our lives. 'Marsha Rowe, one of Spare Rib's founding editors and collective member until the mid seventies, has chosen the anthology with the collaboration of members of the collective. She now lives in Leeds, and is part of a socialist feminist women's group which has been meeting for six years.'
Spare Rib ReaderEDITED BY MARSHA ROWEPENGUIN BOOKSPenguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, EnglandPenguin Books, 625 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10022, U.S.A.Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, AustraliaPenguin Books Canada Ltd, 2801 John Street, Markham, Ontario, Canada L3R1B4Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, 182-190 Wairua Road, Auckland 10, New ZealandThis collection first published in Penguin Books 1982This collection copyright © Spare Ribs Ltd, 1982Copyright in each contribution is held by its contributorAll rights reservedMade and printed in the Great Britain byRichard Clay (The Chaucer Press) Ltd,Bungay, SuffolkSet in Monophoto PlantinExcept in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by the way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser
AcknowledgementsSpare Rib wish to thank all contributors for permission to reprint their material in this collection. We have made every attempt to contact contributors, but in some cases were regrettably unable to do so.
ContentsIntroduction Marsha Rowe	13Note	231	IMAGEA Weight Off My Head Karen Durbin	27Marilyn Monroe Margaret Walters	31Images of Janis Joplin Margaret Walters	32Being Jewish: Anti-Semitism and Jewish Women Rozsika Parker	34What Katy Didn't Do Camilla Nightingale	34Round in a Flat World Tessa Weare	38Why Not Slip into Something a Little More Comfortable? Lisa Tickner	39Alice Plinth Jo Nesbitt	48You Don't Know What is Happening Do You, Mr Jones? Laura Mulvey	48Censored Rozsika Parker	57Tooth & Nail	6oA Day in the Life of... Janice	61Disabled Women Anna Briggs interviews Muriel	61Speaking Out on Age Pauline Long	61Put a Her in Your Hertz Anna Coote	62'What Offends One of Us Won't Offend the Next Chap': The Advertising 	Standards Authority's Line on Sexism Jill Nicholls and Pat Moan	65Suffrage Posters Paula Harper	702	FAMILYPoem Olive Schreiner	79Lucy Interviewed by her daughter Liz	79Thursday, 21 August Ann calks to Lynn Pearson	82Caring for the Disabled Anna Briggs	85Living with a Difference: Cypriot Stories Ayse, Mariaand Zeynep	85Devil Children Margaret Walters	88Out of the Closet into the Courts Eleanor Stephens	91'I Keep Digging Our Relationship Up' Sue Cox	99Life on Social Security Jane Hutt and Mary Giles talked to 'Mary'	1023	CHILDCAREChanging Childcare Marsha Rowe	105Not So Much a Day Nursery Dartmouth Park Hill, London	112A Playgroup Called Freedom Women from Armagh	120South Oxford Nursery Stays Oxford City Nursery Campaign, Newshort	124Oxford Nursery Plays On Oxford City Nursery Campaign, Newshort	125New Creche Angela Phillips	126Editorial Spare Rib Collective	1274	HOUSEWORKHistory of the Housewife Catherine Hall	131Memories of My Mother-in-Law Merlin Clarke	137Daffodils, Cards – and Wages Jill Nicholls	141'Our Food Co-op Knows the Best Place' Alison Fell and Jill Nicholls	143His and Her Housework Wendy Whitfield	1475	WORKGeneral Maid Minnie Cowley	153Against the 'Gentlemen of Justice': Portuguese Cleaners Unite 	News Feature	159Yorkshire Fisherwomen Peter Frank	161Sweatshop at Home Chris Poulter	166Waitress du Jour Joyce Betries	169'Brook Street Bureau Got Big By...' Sally Jones	174Are You a Typewriter? Clare Cherrington	179I am Your Automatic Worker Jane Barker	187Danger: Women's Work Women and work Hazards Group	188I'm Gonna be an Electrical Engineer Margaret Charman interviewed 	by Angela Phillips	191'So Long as It's Red and Going Where They're Going They'll Get on' 	Doris Pitts interviewed by Jill Nicholls	193Probation Officer Jean McCrindle	199'Being a Woman Doctor' Barbara Jacobs	200Nursing and Racism Amrit Wilson	201What Happened at Heywood Marsha Rowe	203Grunwick Women Beatrix Campbell and Valerie Charlton	210The Grunwick strike is now officially over... New-short	216Save the Green Bethnal Green Hospital workers interviewed by	Amanda Sebestyen	217'It's Really Stirred up the Factory': Trico Women Win Jill Nicholls	223Lesbians Ignite Anny Brackx	225'We're Not Criminals': Prostitutes Organize Victoria Green	227Women Farmers in Zambia Barbara Rogers	2306	EDUCATIONFeminist Subversion Margaret Edney	236Altwood Comprehensive Newshort	243Schoolgirls up against Sexism Debra Peart and Jenny Smith	244It's Trousers Time! Susan Hemmings	247Ten Ways to Counter Sexism in a Junior School Sally Shave	248Acting it Out Jasmine, Diane, Cynthia, Linda, Dawn	249No More School Meals Jill Nicholls	250Diary of a Feminist Teacher Kate Elliott	250Working with Girls Val Carpenter	256Sex with Your Tutor? lt's His Fringe Benefit Deborah Cameron	2577	THE ARTSUnderground Women Griselda Pollock	262Lucy Lippard on American Women's Conceptual Art Exhibition, London 	Reviewed by Rozsika Parker	268Dedicated to the Unknown Artist Susan Hiller interviewed by Rozsika Parker	268Portrait of the Artist as Housewife Rozsika Parker	272The Lost Theatre Jules Holledge	276The Death of Buzz Goodbody Michele Roberts andAlison Fell	284Anna Wickham and Her Poetry Naomi Lewis	285Positive Discrimination Michelene Wandor	286Tales I Tell My Mother Reviewed by Katherine Gieve	288Liverpool Worker Writes: War of Words Olive, Maria and Helen talk 	to Eileen Fairweather	289Clapperclaw Reviewed by Jill Nicholls	290Terri Quaye Interviewed by Marion Fudger	291Love Music/Hate Sexism Lucy Tothpaste	295Gynaecocratia: 8 January, Midwife's Day, Greece Meriel Skinner	2978	SEXUALITYGoing All the Way Sara Rance	305Don't Get Too Near the Big Chakra Anne Severson	312'Readers' Poems' Margaret S. Chalmers	318The Moon within Your Reach Eleanor Stephens	319How Did We Get This Way? Sue Cartledge and Susan Hemmings	326Physical Relationships and the Disabled Woman Julie Mimmack	336The Feelings behind the Slogans Eileen Fairweather	338If the Cap Fits Rozsika Parker	3459	HEALTHBlood Money Amanda Sebesyen	355'Most of Us Had Three or Four' Agnes Marchant and her daughter 	Susan interviewed by Rozsika Parker	359Visit to an Italian Health Centre Marie Arnold	364New Zealand Clinic Bombed Newshort	368Clinic Bombed, Cleveland, USA Newshort	368Puerto Rico: 35 Per Cent of Women of Childbearing Age Sterilized	Lynn di Piecro	369Breakthrough in Male Contraception	374Radical Midwives Jenny Spinks	375'My World Became the Size of the Baby' Catherine Ballard and Hilary Hackett	384Agoraphobia Hilary Wilce	393Liz: Alcoholics Anonymous Interviewed by Marsha Rowe	395Stretched to Breaking Point Rozsika Parker, Jane Wilson and Alison Fell	400With a Little Help from Ourselves Carol Morrell	407Opening Myself to Change Frances Seton	410How to Run a Health Course Brent Women's Centre	416'To Lose a Breast Seemed More Terrible than Dying' Lin Layram	420My Mother Died Two Years Ago Norma Pitfield	427Joan Scott: Living Her Dying Ann Scott	42810	VIOLENCELeeds: Curfew on Men Eileen Fairweather	441'He's Got to Show Her Who's Boss' National Women's Aid Federation	442Three Battered Women Face the Future Stephanie Markman	449Pornography: Between the Devil and the True Blue Whitehouse 	Ruth Wallsgrove	450Talking with an Egyption Feminist: Nawal el Saadawi Jill Nicholls	455Action on Clitoridectomy Jill Nicholls	455How Can We Support Our Sisters? Editorial	456To School with Fear Polly talked to Tom Cottle	457'They're Killing Us in Here' Perminder Dhillon	461Nuclear Weapons: Stay Home and Die Lucy Whitman	463'The Primary Purpose is to Help Raped Women Regain Their Strength as 	Individuals': Crisis Centre Opens Victoria Green	464Defending Ourselves Alison Fell, Victoria Green and Rozsika Parker	46811	STATENetherley United Maria O'Reilly	483Dependence and a New Political Consciousness Katherine Gieve	490Mice in Manchester Rose Ades and Eleanor Stephens	492In on the Act Jill Nicholls and Ruth Wallsgrove	499Pay Figures Fall Jill Nicholls	500All our worst nightmares… Newshorts Editorial, Jill Nicholls	501Harassment at Heathrow Jill Nicholls, Angela Phillips and Ruth Wallsgrove	501Immigration Tests in Britain Jill Nicholls, Angela Phillips and Ruth Wallsgrove	502One Wins, One Loses Pat Fitzsimons and Kath McKay	503Inside Maureen Reynolds interviewed by Rozsika Parker	504Living with the Army in Your Front Garden Mary McKay	513Women in Chile: A Year after the Coup Tracy Ulltviet-Moe	522Dora Tamana Rosalynde Ainslie	525Women against the Shahs Ruth Wallsgrove and Susan Hemmings	534Iran: Women for Freedom Ruth Wallsgrove	536United Nations Notices Women Jill Nicholls	53612	WOMEN'S LIBERATION MOVEMENTAdam's Knobby Rib Sheila Rowbotham	543'A Serious Proposal to the Ladies' Sheila Rowbotham	545Women against the Demon Drink Amanda Sebestyen	547Jessie Edited by Suzie Fleming and Golden Dallas	553Nine Years Together Belsize Lane women's Group	561Womanweb Alison Fell	575Women Together: Edinburgh Sixth National Women's Liberation 	Conference Northern Women's Liberation Rock Band	577Going Back to the Beginning Jill Nicholls	579Women's Liberation 1977 News Round-up	581Consciousness Raising: Back to Bastes Gill Philpott describes her experience	585Why Socialist Feminism? Gatherings in Paris and Amsterdam 	Michael Ann Mullen	588Black Women Together Organization of Women of Afro-Caribbean and 	Asian Descent	589We Will Walk without Fear: 12 November News Roundup	590Finding Each Other at School Naomi, Petra, Jane, Julie, Rachel, 	Kate and Jill Nicholls	595'We are All Criminals': Women's Liberation in Spain Anita Bennett and 	Jill Nicholls	596Decades: Talking across the Century Gail Lewis, and Hazel Hunkins Hallinan	talking with Carole Spedding and Amanda Sebestyne	603Afterword by the Spare Rib Collective	607Index	609
IntroductionRereading seventy-seven copies of Spare Rib magazine, from the first issue to the December issue of 1978, has been a strange journey back into the past for me. I was unprepared for the replay of experience which the reading provoked. As the memories surfaced they had the vivid quality that old people talk about when they recall childhood; they evoked feelings more far-reaching than reading old letters and more disturbing than nostalgia. I lived again the four years when I worked on Spare Rib. I remembered my first feminist involvement in the early seventies as a time which felt like being reborn in slow stages, and I relived anguish, bitterness, embarrassment, exhilaration, determination and hope. The emotions faded as I began to see a structure for ordering the mass of material, of articles, news reports and reviews, out of which to select for this anthology. I have chosen themes to reflect, as far as possible, the issues brought into focus by the women's movement during the decade, although often the divisions seemed false, as the areas constantly flowed into one another.Spare Rib was begun because of the impetus of the women's liberation movement, but it was also a daughter of the underground press. It was a product of the counter-culture and a reaction against it. The newspapers and magazines that sprouted up as part of the youth culture of the sixties included IT, OZ and Frendz, all based in London. Their production was made possible by the technical development of offset litho printing, which did not entail expensive metal blocks for photo and type. Offset litho also meant that designers had more free play in layout. Colour could spread over margins, pictures could be stuck down at odd angles, and the page could be assembled so that print and colour superimposed upon each other, the psychedelic result resplendent with the excitement of experimenting with symbols, words and technique.The visual effect of OZ magazine especially was often spectacular, like a cubist painting done by a surrealist, an attempt to deny the dimensions of the flat page, not by the single viewpoint realism of a photograph, but by simultaneously representing as many different perspectives as possible. It was a graphic exploration of the youth-culture aesthetic, the expansion of consciousness, affirming the power of the imagination, and posing the validity of subjective experience against establishment values. The underground press offered an alternative outlet, a more authentic voice for the concerns and mood of the youth movement than the mass media.The editorial content was eclectic, covering ecology, sexuality, communal living, drugs, music, Third World politics, food, health, mysticism, psychology amongst others. Germaine Greer described the free­ wheeling inclinations and interests of the underground in the July issue of OZ in 1969: 'The political character of the underground is still amorphous, because it is principally a clamour for freedom to move, to test alternative forms of existence to find if they were practicable, and if they were more gratifying, more creative, more positive, than mere endurance under the system.'These aspirations were given shape in the music of the sixties, which drew on a host of sources: folk, blues, soul, jazz, country and western, rock and roll. The music, at small events, or combined with 'happenings' or at enormous festivals which drew thousands of young people together, integrated the counter-culture more than any other single element and also revealed its emphasis. The cultural radicalism had energy and vision but it was also a dream world, dependent on the prosperous, consumerist society it criticized. A young woman interviewed in Spare Rib No. 4 said that, on looking back, she felt betrayed: 'At first, the alternative way of life was great, back in the days of flower power, but when the initial enthusiasm wore off, most people didn't make the effort needed to actually plan and work for an alternative society.'But the disintegration had begun earlier, partly because the rhetoric of free love and dope was legally unacceptable. These two were twin births - the sexual and the spiritual - of the counter-culture's reaction against repression of libido. Mind-expanding drugs, as the means for heightened spiritual awareness which would release creative potential and radicalize the person, became 'the politics of ecstasy'. However, of course, the drugs were illegal and those who took them were subject to criminal law.The flaunting of a defiant sexuality also provoked legal prosecution.IT (International Times) was taken to court for publishing small ads for homosexuals, despite the legalization of homosexuality between 'consenting adults in private'. Police seized OZ magazine's 'School Kids 'Issue', produced by a guest editorial ream of twenty young people. The charge brought, not against the school kids, but the three OZ editors, was the first time the Obscene Publications Act, 1959, was combined with a moral conspiracy charge. The three were convicted and given jail sentences. During the trial, the prosecuting barrister accused the community of which the magazine was a part of being without love. Richard Neville responded that, on the contrary, OZ was against the guilt and obsession of repressed sexuality and that 'OZ was trying to redefine love, to broaden it, extend it and revitalize it, so it could be a force of release and not one of entrapment'.The irony of this was that, while this may have been true for men, it was rarely the case for women. The underground press used sex-objectifying images which had developed from being fairly romantic to stridently sadistic. The women who worked on its magazines and newspapers served the men and did the office and production work rather than any editorial work. After a time on OZ I had worked for the defence in the OZ trial, and the cover of that issue was a montage of pictures of a naked woman in erotic display. In November 1971, three months after the trial, I went to the women's liberation demonstration outside the Albert Hall, the second against the Miss World competition, and was beginning to feel contradictions exploding inside my head. One of the banners read, 'Stop Miss World we want to get off', and Gay Liberation did a street show, with people dressed up as 'Miss Laid' and 'Miss Used'.By the end of the sixties there had been a change in the underground press itself. Many of the journals were struggling to survive financially. The alternative-lifestyle communities had begun to shrink and retreat, and newer, more politically based activity had developed. Release, originally organized in Notting Hill, London, to assist people on drug busts, had become more like a community law centre, helping on a wide variety of issues, including the rights of squatters. In 1968 the Claimants' Union had started up in Birmingham and subsequently spread throughout the country. The gay liberation and the women's liberation movements had formed. By January 1972 the women in Gay Liberation had broken away to form their own autonomous gay movement. The alternative newspaper INK, which had been planned as a 'bridge between the underground and the straight press' by some of the people associated with OZ magazine and others in 1970, had shifted from this liberal position. Its new perspective was to serve as a 'national liberation paper' and it was run by an editorial collective. Its politics were on the home front, linked to different radical groups, and devoting whole issues to subjects such as Ireland, or romantic love.There was a strong international element to the underground, and copies of the radical American press arrived regularly at the OZ office. One day RAT had appeared, transformed into Liberation, and I read that women had taken over the running of the newspaper as a protest gesture against male supremacy. These women were no longer willing to serve or to remain appendages co men. Feelers began to tendril their way round my imagination and I wondered whether such an action could happen in Britain. Then Michelene Wandor, who was poetry editor on Time Out magazine, suggested to a friend, Louise Ferrier, who had helped on OZ, INK and the OZ trial, that we call a meeting of women who worked in the underground press.The first meeting was held in December 1971 and about fifty women came, including women from Time Out (which had started a news section in competition with INK). Some of the women did work on editorial, but the majority did not. The main impression that has stayed in my mind is of women voicing the other side of sexual permissiveness, talking of pain and anxiety about abortions, the problems of obtaining an abortion earlier in the sixties, and in one case of a woman having gone through pregnancy as a teenager only to see the child adopted. The discussion about work took second place to the one about sexuality. So much of our lives had been concealed from each other, it was as if we had been strangers. Other impressions were the way the room seemed to swirl with emotion so long suppressed and that I was frightened. After everyone left, Louise and I couldn't sleep and sat up for hours feeling terribly shaken, nervous and near hysteria, clinging to each other every now and then for reassurance.The meetings continued and I met Rosie Bycott who worked on the Notting Hill newspaper Frendz. At the third meeting we suggested the idea of producing an alternative magazine for women. This was prompted by all we had learned on the underground press, which included the notion that self-organizing was possible, as well as familiarity with the mechanics of production and distribution. Rosie had some journalistic experience on Frendz, while my editorial experience was limited to research and helping on layout. Different groups forming the London Women's Liberation Workshop at the time were taking turns to produce the newspaper Shrew, but we had not found it easy to obtain copies. Three issues of the Women's Newspaper had also been published although we had not heard of it then. We wanted to produce something which would reach out to women and which would also use and test our own capabilities.We held two meetings shortly after that to discuss the idea. Lots of women came with advice and suggestions. Rosie and I set off the next week to see a distributor and rashly committed ourselves to producing the first issue six months hence, in June 1972(which we did). We stencilled off a questionnaire to find out what other women wanted, and handed it out at a conference organized by Time Out and The Other Cinema at the Roundhouse on 'Repression and Responsibility in the Media' inFebruary1972. Women suddenly disrupted the conference in the early afternoon, parading with placards, one of which read, 'With brothers like these who needs chauvinists'. They took over the microphones and assembled on the stage to protest against the way the conference ignored discrimination against women, the sexism of the alternative press and the structure of the conference itself. I was confused but crept out of my seat to join them.We raised a fairly small sum, £2,000 (which we nevertheless hoped would cover costs until sales money began to come in), from various sympathetic individuals who were probably worried about our lack of editorial experience and supported our enthusiasm more than anything else. By this time, INK had collapsed because of economic difficulties, and the whole idea of national press alternatives had dissolved like the 'Day the Music Died'. We formed a limited company for Spare Rib and allocated shares.The suggestion to call the magazine Spare Rib was originally a joke but it stuck. Kate Hepburn designed the logo and the layout grid. When Spare Rib started Kate did the artwork with Sally Doust, who had been an editor for Vogue magazine in Australia when I worked there as secretary production assistant. Marion Fudger came to do the advertising and Rose Ades production. Rosie Parker visited the office after reading about Spare Rib in the Guardian and in a short time became a contributing editor. We worked as a hierarchy initially because Rosie Boycott and I were the only ones with experience of magazines. This gradually broke down as everyone learned more and as ideas about collective organization from the women's movement filtered through to us. Rosie Boycott and I were criticized by the others for being so competitive with each other that we did not give anyone else a chance to talk or to discuss the content of the magazine democratically.By the end of 1973 the magazine was produced collectively. This meant that the office work was shared on a rota system, with each woman in turn taking the responsibilities, but the editorial and design were discussed at collective meetings and everyone learned to do their own paste-up for articles, co-ordinating with the designer. We shared tasks like cleaning the office as well as the editorial work. We also tried to recognize individual skills and interests, and the collective gave women a chance to concentrate on work they found most rewarding.I was aware of a change in the political atmosphere around the time of starting Spare Rib, which seemed to be one of coming down to earth. This was reflected in how we approached Spare Rib's design and production. Instead of the irregular, anarchic production of OZ which had been published according to people's time and energy, we aimed to produce a magazine on a regular, monthly basis. This was in response to the demands of the distributor, the way commercial women's magazines are published, and because we felt a need to prove that we could be professional and efficient. This revealed our lack of confidence. It was also to do with the way the relaxed optimism of the sixties had faded and the fact that being 'cool' and 'laid back' had existed for the men, but not for the women who had handled the nitty­ gritty work in the underground. The layout of the magazine was meant to be calmer, clearer and easier to read. We felt it had to be grounded in a style which would reflect the manner in which we were redefining ourselves as women. Instead of seeing ourselves in a world set apart, we were beginning to connect with the lives of other women. It was part of a broadening out of our political awareness. The Night Cleaners Campaign had started in 1970 - 'It was the first time, in London at least, that women's liberation became actively involved in a struggle among working women to organize themselves' 1 - and women went out to leaflet office buildings after all the office workers had gone home, when the women cleaners started work.When Rosie Boycott and I planned the original questionnaire, it was in candlelight with candle grease dripping over the typewriter, because of the miners' strike. We were vulnerable to pressure from all sides because we were so unsure. Looking back over our notes for the original questionnaire, I find them direct and simply put. But when we came to type them up for the stencil, we inserted coy copy, stilted phrases and advertising jargon. This extended to the magazine itself. Until one contributor, Lilian Roxon, pointed out the omission, we did not even preface articles with introductions.After the first three issues of Spare Rib there was a row with some men we knew who thought we should address the magazine to them as well as to women. This divided our loyalties, and when we reasserted ourselves as women producing a magazine for women, a new relationship began to develop amongst us. My feelings towards other women began to take on the deep significance I had previously recognized only in relationships with men. My heterosexual orientation remained but the depth of my feelings towards the women with whom I worked each day were as powerful as the emotions of sexual love.Spare Rib was beset with economic crises. Not relying on advertising revenue freed the magazine workers from the subtle self-censorship which occurs in commercial women's magazines and allowed for more editorial independence, but it also meant survival depended on sales. The magazine was baled out of crises by generous donors and also by benefits we organized to which many people came and through which we felt the women's movement as a supportive presence. The first music benefit was at the Marquee, London, in June 1974. That night I was aware of a warmth and creativity, like the feelings at similar events in the sixties, but this time I felt it included my whole being. It did not entail the earlier distortion and caricaturing of the self.When Spare Rib began, we saw it as an activity and consciousness raising process combined. We were a bit prickly and oversensitive about how much there was to learn, but the advantage of that position was that we did not set ourselves up as feminists superior to readers. From the beginning we invited contributions from readers, including women not active in the women's movement, and, as time went on, we developed this, seeing the magazine in a two-way role, sifting information and ideas and continually making alterations according to response. In this way the style and the content of Spare Rib changed. We had originally decided to publish a magazine rather than a newspaper since we thought women would find that more approachable. We had to think how and why Spare Rib would be different from other women's magazines. At that time Nova (now defunct) was the newest magazine on the market. It had a reputation as the women's magazine read by men, and added current affairs to the usual fashion, food and homemaking of the monthly magazines. But it carried no alternative values, and since the underground culture had been about a new way of being, it was remote to us. We were also consumers, but we thought our manner of consumption was different. We decided to incorporate the traditional elements of women's magazines into Spare Rib, but to express them in other ways. The first issue had a double-page spread on jeans, with photos of fat, thin, tall and short people, none of whom were models. Friends did cookery columns from their own recipes, often emphasizing cheapness. We had cosmetic columns about alternatives, such as cucumber cleanser. We were still concerned with beauty, although we also tried to pan it and to examine it. A regular 'Looks' column once featured a man taken to a hairdresser, given a facial and made up by a beautician (but its lampooning was taken seriously by some readers); another explored the women characters' obsessive preoccupation with appearance in Jean Rhys's novels. There was a man's page, not only to make a satirical comment on the tokenism of women's pages in newspapers, but because we wanted men to write exploring their feelings. There was a page for children and a demystifying do-it-yourself column, 'Spare Pans', on technical topics such as changing electric plugs, car maintenance, shoe repairs and printing. These interests were dropped over the first two to three years.A more articulate feminist editorial content emerged from the early Spare Rib format, which had been a jumble of articles from established women journalists and novelists, feminists and women learning to write for the first time. The early photos and illustrations often presented women with controlled, passive faces, or echoed titillating, clinical or anti-women attitudes, and this also changed as the women's movement grew, as Spare Rib became more identified as a part of it, and as more feminist photographers and illustrators appeared.The women's magazines from the big publishing houses strike me now as carrying contradictory messages in a similar way to the first issues of Spare Rib, although it has never had the bulk of their advertising, nor is it published for profit. Their feature content both reflects and informs social awareness of changes in women's legal and economic position through the seventies. Previously taboo subjects like abortion or sexuality are now included. Questions such as how to combine childcare and work, accepting infertility, male fear of women's independence, the legal rights of women cohabitees, 'mature students', are discussed. But they are also accompanied by both editorial and advertising content which undermine the stance of these topics and conjure up a world where women's consciousness is unchanging. Their political comment is confined to views expressed in reviews, to the occasional interview with a woman politician, or to warnings about where it may be dangerous to travel on holiday. Although some columnists are more feminist, many of the magazines still have men columnists propounding views about the 'real' woman, who does not fuss her pretty head with ideas, who is mystified in her 'feminine glory'; or there are health columns written by doctor who perpetuate paternalistic attitudes. Articles on women and work tend to concentrate on the ability of the exceptional woman to succeed in a career despite discrimination, and are aimed at the middle-class rather than the working-class woman. Cosmetics and underwear are advertised as merchandise which women can buy to discover and express their essence, their individuality, their real selves. Occasionally there is a hint of masochism. We used to joke that the only advertisements showing women as active were those for sanitary protection, but now there is a fashion market for clothes like jumpsuits to jog in, and tampons have become 'the key to freedom'.To reflect the diversity of Spare Rib's content over the years would have taken an anthology twice as long as this one. Overall, I have chosen articles to illustrate both the development of ideas in the women's movement and the development of Spare Rib. There are inevitable gaps. There are many campaigns, arguments about strategies and aims, and debates about theory which are not included and there are specific areas of interest, such as religion, or anthropology or community organizing which have had to be left out. I have aimed for a balance within sections between articles which describe personal experience, articles which give a feminist analysis and articles which show how women have organized for change. In these areas there are historical examples, although most of the selection is from the seventies, a past so recent it feels part of the continuing present. The emphasis is on first-hand accounts, written by the women involved rather than by journalists observing events from the outside. This is where Spare Rib is a part of a broad feminist concern to find forms by which women can communicate perceptions to oppose the ideology of oppression, of race, class or sex. The longest section is on paid work, since this is the area most consistently covered by Spare Rib, demonstrating how basic and important a place it holds in women's lives. Many sections illustrate the way events have overtaken and modified a number of the early demands of the women's movement. Whereas at first it seemed possible for demands on the state and for self-organizing to exist side by side, to use and to learn from each approach, activities have been curtailed or changed direction because of the economic crisis, government policy and cuts in public spending, but the anthology shows that these changes have not been limited to defensive action. Most of the articles are about women living in Britain. There are some from outside Britain which show how local conditions produce particular insights and methods of organizing, and of international similarities and differences. The perspective, of some sections especially, is peculiar to the seventies without losing relevance now - for instance, the health section concentrates on reproduction although the health movement had a broader scope by the end of the decade. The different writings in this anthology show that there is an intricacy and range to women's experience, a resilience of spirit despite the harshest of lives, capacities for courage, love, intellect and humour and for resistance and action.None of the articles has been altered from the original published but some have been cut for length, or excerpts chosen for quotes and if so it is indicated by.... A group on the Spare Rib collective revised the anthology so that the final choice is the result of our collaboration. I'd like to thank Ruthie Petrie for all the work she put into co-ordinating at each stage and for her support.I would also like to thank Barbara Charles for suggesting some changes in placement, Tina Reid who helped to edit my long introductions, and Julia Vellacott who was editor at Penguin when the work began. Thanks too to many people for encouragement and understanding, including Caroline Bond, Lee Comer, Rosie Graham, Stef Pixner and Chris Rawlence particularly over the introductions, and to Sian Dodderidge, Alison Fell, Sarah Perrigo, Rachel Peto and Sheila Rowbotham.MARSHA ROWE, Leeds
NOTEThe selection of articles from Spare Rib 1 to 77 was made by Marsha Rowe, and the section from issues 78 to 1100 was later made by four members of the present Spare Rib collective: Susan Hemmings, Sue O'Sullivan, Ruthie Petrie and Ruth Wallsgrove.
1	IMAGEIn the imagery of everyday life- films, television, radio, newspapers, magazines, books- women are depicted as inferior to men. Produced within a male-dominated culture, these images confine women to stereotyped roles, such as the mother who nurtures, the wife who nags, the object of male desire, or the jealous, overbearing mother-in­ law. Although there have been some breakthroughs during the last ten years, these are exceptions and the same overall impression remains. Such images make up the pictorial language of how we are seen in society and how we see ourselves.To overcome women's subordinate position, it IS just as necessary to understand and to change these images as it is to change the outward circumstances of women's lives. This is complicated by the way our society stresses sexual difference, attaching particular value to characteristics which are supposedly either feminine or masculine. We connect certain images with certain ideas and feelings. Ruth Wallsgrove in SR.72 illustrated a spectrum of her self-images. She described how she associated romance and being sexually attractive with the feminine stereotype: 'I imagine myself smaller, softened and rounded, graceful.' But she had an opposite picture when she imagined herself as capable and brave, one which was not concerned with passive appearance. It emphasized function over appearance and could be read as more 'masculine'- she saw herself 'admired not for how I look but for what I do'. The contradictions in these images, between 'doing' and 'being', the 'masculine' and the 'feminine', meant that when she came to describe her day-to-day self, trying to combine and express both qualities, her feelings became ambiguous. She said: 'I hope I look rough and friendly: I'm afraid I look rather large and clumsy.' She began to explore a space which women are not supposed to occupy because it stretches the frontiers of the 'feminine' and goes into the world of 'masculine' assertiveness and independence. It is easy to feel we have become too big for our boots rather than gaining confidence, since we are susceptible too to the caricatured social image given to feminism. This caricature both allays the fear feminism arouses and attempts to contain the threat it poses to established patterns.When we think of our self-image, we also include our gestures and the way we talk. Our consciousness of ourselves and of others is affected by our class background and by the particular culture we inherit. Women have begun to explore these dimensions of image, in order to see how the experience of class or race is communicated. This means we can look at women's role in reproducing these images and challenge aspects which are oppressive. In one issue of Spare Rib a woman talked about the competitiveness of her academic education. This brought a continual pressure to prove one's personal superiority over others: 'Everybody grades each other, there's a combination of arrogance and self-confidence, and talking about other people in the most clever terms possible by which you also subtly put people down.' She recognized that her middle-class family life had prepared her for this in the way it maintained aloof relationships: 'Talk at my parents, home had to be interesting, or civilized, or important. Now I talk more about what I would have considered either boring or slightly embarrassing details, which I was always suppressing, (SR.30). The images of women show the tangible connection between our imagination and the world outside ourselves, and the new images we produce represent the changes we experience and hope for. A feminist photographer, Jo Spence, put it this way: 'What we need to do with our own pictures and with our own self-image if you like is to shift the emphasis back to a point where we understand that everything we do as women has a validity- not just the perfect moments, (SR.68).			SR.64, November 1977
A Weight Off My HeadKAREN DURBINExcerpts from a diary:27 August. I 'm going to get my hair cut off. I 'm tired of it. Have to find a good place that won't leave me feeling miserable.31 August. Spent four pounds and two hours at one of the fanciest hairdressers in London yesterday and came out looking like a suburban matron, circa 1962. Awful. Bought some clippers and finished the job myself. It now looks properly boyish. I'm at last glad I got it cut... Spirits have risen considerably... I really feel like working again. Amazing what a new head will do for a woman.4 September. This hair-cutting business means something. Several things, probably, none of which I've been willing to think about. But here goes. Images of shorn heads fill my mind - and, oddly, propel me to the bathroom to take a little more off. The French girls whose heads were shaved in punishment for sleeping with German soldiers. Lavinia in Titus Andronicus after she's been raped and mutilated. Help. What's going on here? It feels sexless to have so little hair. And defiant. As if I'm thumbing my nose at the whole idea of trying to be sexy. It also feels satisfyingly unserious. Motives? Well, I wanted to... But. Withdrawing. Retreating. Making declarations to myself, to R. Punishing myself and him? Oh, but it does feel good. Parting with vanity. End of earth mama/ drug queen era. Simpler and not so heavy to look like this. I'm travelling light.It was an eventful summer. A long, complicated love affair came unravelled, leaving me completely on my own for the first time in several years. I quit my secure, well-paid government job to take a chance at the insecure, badly paid hustle of freelance writing. And I got my hair cut off.You mightn't think the third item on the list deserves robe up there with the other two, but it docs. Hair is important, a potent symbol dating back to (and doubtless well beyond) the Samson myth. A woman I know said that when she cuts her husband's hair, he gets nervous.'He likes the way I cut it,' she said, 'but it's a castration thing. It freaks him out a little every time.'Hair is a symbol of sexuality. Among the more austere sects of Orthodox Jews, a married woman must wear a wig to cover her hair when she appears in public. To go bareheaded would be an insult to her husband, a display of wantonness.The heroine of Ibsen's p lay Hedda Gabler is considered to be one of the most powerful and difficult roles for an actress to play. Hedda is a dynamo, larger than life, who rages against the stifling bourgeois world of her marriage. But a motif that runs through the play is Hedda's thin hair and her anger at its thinness. It infuriates her that Thea Elvsted, the soft, gent le little lady who competes with her for the affections of a poet- lover, has thick, luxuriant hair. In the play, Thea is the essential female. Hedda, for all her immense force of character, is a sexless creature- stormy and ambitious, more interested in making an impact on the world than in making love.Finally, take a look at the last fifteen years. I reached puberty in the America of the late 1950s, the era of the post-war togetherness, when the family was glorified out of all proportion, when sex roles were rigidly defined and sex itself was suppressed. The boys I dated had crew-cuts and 'flat-tops'; they came as close to being bald as they could without shaving their heads. The girls I knew had short, neat haircuts or, if their hair was long, carefully set, shoulder-length pageboys. (Manufacturers got rich off hair spray in the fifties the way they're getting rich off vaginal deodorants now.)We were, of course, Good Girls and Nice Boys, well-behaved, middle-class children, the future leaders of our country. The Bad Boys and Bad Girls had more hair. The boys had duck's ass Elvis cuts, well greased, with a teardrop curl in the front. The girls looked like Jane Russell or Marilyn Monroe- long, loose hair than ours, with slightly frowsy waves falling over one eye. The difference between our styles was one of sex. Bad Boys and Bad Girls were frankly sexy, with their greasy curls and frowsy, flopping waves. We knew about them: they Did It, at drive-in movies, in parked cars. They were going to go blind some day, and they weren't going to be the future leaders of their country.Then came the sixties, and the previous decade's hard shell of sexual myths cracked wide open. The line between good girls and bad girls began to blur. We were all on the Pill by the middle of the decade. Boys stopped looking like Marine sergeants and started looking like the Beatles. Political protest marches filled the streets, the women's movement erupted, and sex roles started breaking down. Through it all was this amazing sprouting - hair seemed to grow on everybody under thirty. The phrase 'long-hair' in America no longer meant artistic foreigners who played Beethoven, it meant kids. We were like so many green weeds, shooting up through the cracks in the concrete. At first, the change was moderate. Girls wore long, smooth, straight hair, ironing it for hours, if necessary. It looked more natural than the elaborate hairdos of the fifties, but if you weren't blessed with long, smooth, straight hair, you had to work at it. Boys' hair remained cautiously Beatle-length, which wasn't so static, since the Beatles appeared on every new album cover with another inch of hair.By the end of the decade, the vanguard types who started out shaggy had gone into Total Freak. Afros, Isros, great tumbling, tangled clouds of hair emanated from their heads. And the style had filtered back to the straight world. Stockbrokers got their new long locks 'shaped' at special unisex barbers. Young construction workers showed three inches of curl below the edges of their hardhats. It was a very hairy time, memorialized in a musical that's still running in the West End. A restrictive sexual morality had given way to something looser, easier, more fun, and we wore the symbol of the change on our heads.For women, especially, it was as if we were announcing our sexuality. I remember vividly when I stopped setting my long hair. I'd gone to the country with some friends, and we got caught Saturday afternoon in a summer shower. For me, that meant waist-length instant frizz. I was about to hide the mess in a scarf when our host, a photographer, asked if he could take some pictures of it. He put me in front of bright lights, sat me on rocks out in the sun, generally made me feel like Verouschka. 'You've got wonderful hair,' he kept rhapsodizing. 'God, it does so many things.' My lover looked on, grinning. We'd had a running battle for six months over the issue of my 'ugly' hair, and now he'd found an ally.I wore my hair like that for almost four years. It was, as they say, my most distinctive feature. I never did think it was pretty, just wild and woolly. Earth mama/ drug queen. It became a litmus test: uptight people didn't like it, hang-loose hippies did. My lover loved it; he found it sexy. My mother hated it. She probably found it sexy, too. I found it inconvenient. It had a way of getting caught in car doors and other people's coat buttons. It took an hour to wash and brush and a half-day to dry. It got in my eyes when I rode my bicycle.I put up with it, anyway. My only real doubts about it had to do with feminism. I was active in the women's movement, and it always struck me funny to go to a meeting and see all us activist women, in our jeans and teeshirts and sturdy boots, talking about the hassles of being sex objects, and yet, with no more than one or two exceptions at every gathering, we all had outrageous heads of hair. Impractical, inconvenient, downright counter-revolutionary. A good thing we weren't guerrilla fighters in Bolivia. Two yards into the jungle, and we'd all have been hopelessly tangled up in the underbrush.To be fair, I don't think it was simply vanity. We were making a statement with all that hair. That we weren't nice girls any more. That we were wild and woolly and out of control. The movement in America has been dominated largely by middle-class women, and we had myths to break.	Fay McTavish, SR.56, March 1977However, change is in the wind. Very short hair is beginning to look attractive again, on women (although I don't ever want to see another crew-cut again, on man or woman, as long as I live). Our eyes have probably been prepared for this by the advent of the shag. The shag, which became popular in New York a year or so ago, was the definitive compromise haircut, half-long, half-short. Three men I knew turned up in as many weeks then with suspiciously short hair, not very short, but they didn't look freaky any more. Oh, my god, I thought. Here it is, the backlash. The fifties all over again. Nixon. Apathy. Good girls. Bad girls. And all the rest of that dreck.'No, man, that's not it,' said one newly shorn friend. 'It's just that all that hair was getting to be a drag to take care of. This is easier.' I watched him for signs of incipient fascism, but there haven't been any. He goes on being an idealistic radical lawyer for lost causes. Whew.It may just be that we've made our point, and we don't need to make it any longer. Short hair is easier to live with, and it feels as natural and appropriate to my way of life as blue jeans and comfortable shoes. But apart from the issue of announcing one's freedom from convention, there's the nor-so-simple matter of sex. And since, I'm human (and heterosexual) as well as feminist, I can't pretend it's not important to me to know that I can attract men who attract me. At the same time I enjoyed the freedom from all those hours of washing and untangling and drying. I couldn't help wondering if I'd be sexless without my plumage.Fortunately, these questions have a way of answering themselves. There was this party, see, where I met this man... He says I look like a pineapple when I wake up in the morning with my three inches of hair standing up in spikes. But it's O K. Turns out he likes pineapple.SR.18, December1973Marilyn MonroeMARGARET WALTERS... Her death has been called a Hollywood tragedy, an American tragedy, even a tragedy of civilization. I think it's a feminine tragedy. Her life is frightening to women simply because she's so familiar to us; she sums up all the contradictions of a particular feminine stereo­ type. She reminds us of the death wish that's hidden in our narcissism, the dark other face of glamour.In her public image Marilyn is everything we're told we want to be; in her private life she's everything we fear we probably are.SR 3, September 1972
Images of Janis JoplinMARGARET WALTERS...One of the most exciting things about Janis was the way she broke through the conventional feminine image. She was singing in the sixties when women were only beginning to come together and question their possibilities. At a time when most women performers were still near, composed, careful of their looks, Janis had the courage to appear as she was - spotty, pudgy, haggard -and beautiful. She's beautiful because her face is always changing, because it's so expressive, because she's able to forget it, and herself, in the music. She enjoyed the fact that she offended all the nicely brought up, properly feminine girls, in their panty girdles and make-up: 'That's the way I was raised , man, I know exactly what's on those bitches' minds, they don't like me, man.' She didn't want to be passively pretty, so she often acted hard and butch; she could be hostile to other women because, I think, she feared and hated her own 'femininity'. She had affairs with women, but if Peggy Caserta2 is telling anything like the truth, they seem to have repeated the careless, exploitative power games of straight sex. Everything in the rock world tended to isolate her from other women; one of the saddest things about her life is that she never really realized how much her music meant to other women how much she illuminated our lives.Watching her on film, I'm struck by things I didn't see so clearly back in the sixties. Janis constantly shifts - between songs, almost between bars - from one conventional feminine role to another. One moment she dances gaily, a small girl- wilful, mischievous- trying to charm the grown-ups in her borrowed finery. The next moment she's a honky-tonk lady, rough, generous, comforting; everybody's 'sweet-talkin' sweet-lovin' momma bear'. In yet another mood she comes on like a cheap hooker, hips swaying, tongue between her lips. She hustles, provokes, does a sexy, knowing rap to introduce a song: 'Honey, if you've had your eye on a piece of talent and that chick down the road is getting all the action, then you know what you gotta do - Try, just a little bit harder.' Then she ends the set with an act that's as aggressively macho as Mick Jagger, stomping round the stage, playing contemptuously with the mike, kicking the sound into silence. Like the rest of us, Janis was all those things - and none of them. Isolated as she was, living in a man's world, there was no way she could get beyond them, find out what else she could be.But seeing her like that, I started to hear her blues rather differently. Like the Black blues singers she admired, Jan is had the gift of making the most banal songs sound intensely personal. All her songs, and not just the ones she actually wrote, came across with the kick of auto biography. They all work the same ground, over and over again: Women is Losers, A Woman Left Lonely, Little Girl Blue, Cry Baby, I Need a Man to Love. She stays within the familiar circle of blues complaint; she sings about loneliness, the endless search for a good man, who's bound to do you wrong in the end. She protests, endlessly, the unfairness of love, of life, of being a woman. But she can use even a commonplace song to feel her way into her most disturbing emotions. She takes Ma Rainey's great blues song- 'Love is draggin' me down / Just like a ball and chain'- and plays with it, broods on it, stretches it out and slows it down, until it's a complex musical drama that focuses and explores her own pain and anger, and her sense of being trapped, in the end, by her own emotions.And just sometimes, she seems w dig way beneath the old theme of sexual disappointment and frustration, to the most primitive layers of feeling. Sometimes, it's as if she manages to draw on, and voice some primary, primal depression; she's like a child screaming to be filled, to be loved, to be consoled, a child terrified of its own impossible demands, its own rage.I once had a daddy,He said he'd give me everything in sight,Yes he did.So I said, hon, I want the sun, And the stars out of the night. Come on, give it to me, baby, And I want it right now.(Joplin, 'Turtle Blues')Her songs are disturbing, sometimes, because she docs tap some depth of pam and anger that it's almost impossible to confront, in her, in oneself. Janis never escapes from the frightening and predictable circle of feminine suffering and anger. She's 'buried alive in the blues', trapped in the painful contradictions of being a woman, unable to escape because she's fighting alone. But she expresses, communicates, clarifies a pain that most of us know...SR.37, July 1975
Being Jewish: Anti-Semitism and Jewish WomenROZSIKA PARKER... You learn that you suffer and are persecuted for being called 'The Chosen People'- you feel guilty at the arrogant superiority that implies and at the same time guilty for not living up to the name.Michelene Wandor ascribes the guilt to 'the lack of geographical and political roots - it produces all sorts of things and I think guilt is a mixture of knowing you can't be fully Jewish because you don't quite know what it is, or if you know what it is, you can rarely be it.'Another arena of guilt is in relation to the suffering of your parents: 'Their childhood and their suffering, the difficulties they had in going to medical school, how they had to work their way through anti­ Semitism. I felt there was nothing I could do,' says Sheila Y, 'which would be as good as what they had done because I hadn't had to overcome anything.'And yet so much is expected of you. You have to prove that your parents' suffering was worthwhile. Perhaps this creates the excessively self-sacrificing behaviour parodied in the stereotype of 'The Jewish Mother'. Some of us were afraid of behaving like Jewish Mothers. Others were afraid of contributing to the stereotype rather than dissecting it, because we had experienced our Jewish mothers as 'Jewish Mothers' who intimate that all their suffering on our behalf would be justified if only we would live happily ever after with Mr Jewish Right and give them all the grandchildren they deserve. But as Gail says, 'The stereotype bears about as much relation to the majority of Jewish women as the mother-in-law jokes bear to most mother-in-laws.' It's therefore important to understand the precise history of the Jewish family and women's changing place within it...SR.79, February 1979What Katy Didn't DoCAMILLA NIGHTINGALEMany women I know remember the hunt for suitable heroines to identify with. We longed for books about women pilots, women divers, women explorers, climbers and space travellers, or even about girls who were unrepentantly naughty and rebellious. It wasn't just that we couldn't identify with boys in stories, we also wanted to be reassured that we were not to be excluded from the world of action. We ended up reading Biggles and William, and like other girls, we soon got the message that the people who have the adventures and scope to determine the course of their own lives, are men.. . . Boys' adventures take place in all-male societies of motor-racing circuits, the Services, cargo boats. The selection I looked at were about smuggling, rallying, motor racing and trapping. The stories roved all over Europe, America, northern Canada, and the China Seas. Extraordinary fears of physical endurance and skill were involved and the resources of the hero were stretched to the limit. One thing common to them all was the hero's high degree of technical competence in his particular field - the technicalities of motor cars, explosives or traps were all described in detail, and the adventures, though hair-raising enough to be satisfying, were based on a firm grasp of real life.Books especially for girls are set in predominantly female societies like schools, pony clubs, ballet school, and among secretaries, nurses or air hostesses. Adventures are reduced to a kind of social extravaganza. In a school setting this could be the achievement of Angela Brazil's 'sunshine of popularity', by the proper exercise of feminine qualities. In the more sophisticated stories for older girls the aims are social success in the adult world and the capture of the inevitable husband. Lorna Hill has written a whole string of books about different girls at Sadlers Wells. Dance, however, plays a minor part in the stories, which are concerned with the social lives of the characters. There are illustrations of the girls doing various ballet steps, but no real sense is given of the rigorous life a dancer leads, and the technical detail, so emphasized in boys' books is studiously avoided. The difficulties are entirely in adapting to the rarefied world of balletomanes. Other 'girls only' books describe the girls overcoming their desires for adventure and feelings of rebellion described as their capriciousness and wilfulness) and transforming them into acceptable feminine qualities like inner strength and imagination. Remember Join Little Women, and Katy of What Katy Did. Another common plot tells how the girl heroine overcomes the motiveless malice of another girl. These female lagos appear surprisingly frequently, and encourage the belief subscribed to by women themselves, that there is a suspect quality in all women.Current booklists promoted by publishers as 'for girls' show a preponderance of books about love, daring and romance, with a sideline in problems, like spots, glasses and so on, which interfere with romance. Dating is a teenage and subteenage preoccupation, and should be considered in children's books, and so should the physical problems which manifest themselves in the teens. However, the implication in these books is that romance is the purpose of a girl's life, and problems exist in so far as they hinder romance. Boys are interested in dating too, but they are not expected to read books about it.			 Illustration by S. Van Abbe for Little Women... The following quotations are typical:'A girl confident that with A certificate typing, her ugly mug would not impede her career.' – Juliet in Publishing. 	Daddy: 'I know it's a bit of a bore, but shorthand typing never comes amiss'- and later-	Julian: 'I think it would be silly for you to give up this job of yours. Obviously you like it. It's going to get you out and about all over the world and teach you to stand confidently on your own two feet. But maybe in say four years rime you might feel that you've got all you can get out of being a ship's officer and that a home of your own might be a good idea?'- Hester, Ship's Officer.Broadly speaking, books for boys extend the child's desire for adventure and involve him closely with the technical aspects of the development of the plot. Girls' books minimize adventure to social play acting and skate over the technicalities of adult life, clouding them in romance. I think that the great popularity of the school story must lie in the fact that the girl heroine is allowed considerable scope for adventure and rebellion against authority. There are no men present, indeed within the terms of reference of the story, men hardly exist, except in the very menial capacity of gardeners and grooms. There is no need therefore to inhibit the girls to maintain a standard of femininity. Even in school stories however, the girl docs not rebel for the sake of rebelling, or because she questions the authority imposed upon her. It is always revealed that she was acting to uphold the honour of the school.... The family or group adventure story (books] represent a supposedly balanced view of reality, which the single-sex books manifestly do not, but all this means sexual role playing is more subtle. Girls often play a crucial part in the adventure, but the leader and final decision maker is always a boy. The male and female roles are invariably stereotyped when it comes to physical prowess. Boys and girls of similar ages vary a great deal in physical accomplishment, but it is always the girl who jeopardizes the safety of the gang by falling over a tree root, or by her strength giving out halfway up a rope. And it is always a boy, not another girl, who comes back and rescues her. Emotionally, too, girls are a liability in a group adventure. They may, like Anne in the Famous Five, be crybabies who need constant encouragement from the others, or their impulsiveness may thwart the plans of the boy leader, or their extra sensitivity may allow them to sympathize with the other side too much. In all cases, girls become an extra hazard, an old man of the sea for the boys to deal with.. . . An interesting concession to young girls' rebellion is the tomboy. She appears in the younger age range, when little girls are still unsure about accepting female status, and do many of the same things that little boys do, like playing rough games and climbing trees. Tomboys are allowed to play a prominent part in an adventure, even to take over the leadership for part of the time, to be rough, resourceful and to make decisions. They also openly attack the female role that outside people like parents and relations expect them to play. George in the Famous Five is openly scornful of the idea that girls are in any way weaker than boys. Nancy in Swallows and Amazons fiercely defends a girl's ability and right to do anything a boy can do. Unfortunately the tomboy's scorn for the trappings of feminine extends to girls themselves. George treats Anne in exactly the same way that the boys do, patronizing her weakness, and kindly looking after her. Anne maintains the feminine ideal, while George is considered as a boy. Peggy and Susan in Swallows and Amazons spend their time in the galley being good girls, allowing Captain Nancy to have her abberrations. The tomboy seems to be a kind of safety valve for girls who are unsure of their role. She allows free rein to their fantasies of adventure, but at the same time she is sternly contrasted with the real girls. She is allowed no concessions to femaleness, dressing, acting and looking like a boy, and while she herself will not accept the fact she is a girl, she is not totally accepted by the boys. Her world is ultimately unsatisfactory. Perhaps it is better after all to be a real girl.It is interesting to note that the roles are never reversed the other way...SR.23, May 1974
Round in a Flat WorldTESSA WEARE... Everywhere I go, it goes before me, this round full womb. When I sit it nests heavily on my thighs; as I turn my body, my arms brush against it. My skin is unbelievably stretched into this large gourd, this drum, this container. The baby curled inside kicks at my ribs, my pelvis, each side of my body. In about two weeks it will be born.When I walk into a room of people I see them noticing this protruding part of me first, and me second. The more honest stare at it with fascination as they talk to me, others glance furtively pretending they haven't noticed. Many are uneasy, some even physically withdraw from me.Meanwhile in the London streets I'm surrounded by advertising hoardings: thin models displayed across their flat surfaces. And women in the streets, their hips encased in tight jeans, hip-hugging skirts. I find myself staring at their flat bellies, unable to imagine that mine once looked like theirs. And the men too: everyone with bones and protruding genitals. I feel out of place.Sometimes it seems as if I have an invisible seal around my body that both protects me and pushes me apart from everyone else. . . Pregnancy has no place in the sexuality that pervades everything.Once you are pregnant you are 'obviously' another man's property, and rape- physical or verbal - has so much to do with the threat of impregnating the innocent, the vulnerable, or with punishment for being available - and I'm not. So for a long time I've been free from sexual innuendos, grabs at my tits, attempted pick-ups. Men who walk up to me turn away from my womb with a mixture of guilt, fear and disgust on their faces. Strangely, once I was no longer bombarded with sexist sexual advances, it struck me how in one way they gave me a sense of power, of attractiveness, and more importantly, a sense that I existed.SR.78, January 1979
Why Not Slip into Something a Little More Comfortable?LISA TICKNERWoman's dress, too - how perfectly it describes her condition!... from the bonnet string to the paper shoe, she is the hopeless martyr to the inventions of some Parisian imp of fashion. Her tight waist and long, trailing skins deprive her of all freedom of breath and motion. No wonder man prescribes her sphere. She needs his aid at every rum. He must help her up stairs and down, in the carriage and out, on the horse, up the hill, over the ditch and fence, and thus teach her the poetry of dependence. (Elizabeth Cady Stanton, 1857)After the relative freedom of the Regency period, Victorian woman found herself again restricted to quire a severe degree by at least three different aspects of her fashionable dress: by the dignity and expansive graciousness of her heavy skirts, and later crinoline, which hampered her movements and slowed her gait; by the very low set sleeve which prevented her from raising her arms; and by the rightly laced corset which assisted the display of an eighteen-inch waist, restricted her lungs, displaced her internal organs, caused her to faint in warm or tiring circumstances, and generally endangered her health.Fashionable women's clothing had of course been both cumbersome and restricting in the past: no Victorian crinoline was any more ridiculous than the Elizabethan farthingale, or the eighteenth-century panniers it resembled; but the very impracticality of court dress contributed to its ceremonial and hierarchical effect. Far larger numbers of middle-class women, and even cooks and housemaids, were now struggling to survive the day's activities whilst blinkered by their bonnets, trussed up in their corsets, and surrounded by petticoats and whalebone hoops which had to be squeezed through doorways, cautiously manoeuvred up and down staircases, and perched precariously on the edges of armless chairs.Throughout the nineteenth century the criticisms grew, as women realized that their dress was completely unsuitable for anything but the most limited social role. It was no exaggeration to speak of skirts sweeping the streets. Paxton's specially invented floor cleaners were apparently not required at the Great Exhibition after all the floors were kept swept and polished by the ladies' trains; and there are many other comments and anecdotes which refer to the dust they raised and the piles of liner left at the kerb by a skirt and train as the wearer stepped into a carriage after a short walk.The artist G. F. Watts emphasizing the selfishness endemic in fashionable female dress pointed out that it also prevented women from functioning properly. Crinolines and trains were extravagant in form, inconvenient for the wearer and inconsiderate of others. Tight sleeves and gloves made arms and fingers look like rigid sausages, useless for clasping the hand of another in friendship, or for snatching a child suddenly out of danger. But the point was that women were not expected to move quickly or freely, nor to shake hands with vigour, but to combine dignity with delicacy in crinolines and trains which set off the fragility of a narrow waist and tiny hands and feet.The clothing worn by all the newly fashionable sections of society was so exaggerated that it provoked an almost unique phenomenon: a deliberate, and sporadically organized attempt to reform dress and even to abolish vagaries of fashion itself. Why, as Lady Harberton put it, should it be supposed 'that the male form came perfect from the hands of the Creator, while that of the female needs constant tinkering and screwing into shape to make it presentable'?Raising these kinds of questions meant taking on a much wider issue than the cut of a sleeve or the length of a hem, and so the movement for dress reform was inevitably and intricately bound up with the development of nineteenth-century feminism, although not always in an entirely predictable manner. To struggle for women's rights – a fight already under way in the 1850s and 1860s – was by definition to reject the whole contemporary concept of femininity, since ladies did not 'fight' for anything. It was also, and almost automatically, to invite the accusation of 'unwomanlliness', which was the alleged consequence of the hardening influences of public life.The 'strong-minded' or 'platform' woman was the Victorian equivalent of the modern media image of the bigoted and bra-burning 'libber'. Both were convenient stereotypes, identikit pictures to which few if any actual people approximated, which served as a warning backed up by the implied threat of social disapproval and even ostracism. Just as the popular contemporary picture of the feminist is fixed at scruffy denims, a generally unkempt and (in media terms) unappetizing appearance, so the Victorian platform woman was illustrated in Punch with short hair and dark, severely tailored, masculine clothing.There are isolated instances of nineteenth-century women, like George Sand and Helen Weber, who were courageous, extrovert, and perhaps desperate enough to adopt for everyday wear a modified version of masculine dress. Nevertheless, it was hardly likely that in the face of social ostracism, a large number of women would suddenly do so. A less dramatic but a more influential decision was that reached by Elizabeth Smith Miller, working long hours in her garden during the spring of 1851:I became so thoroughly disgusted with the long skirt, that the dissatisfaction, the growth of years, suddenly ripened into the decision that this shackle should no longer be endured. The resolution was at once put into practice. Turkish trousers to the ankle, with a skirt reaching some four inches below the knee, were substituted for the heavy, untidy, exasperating old garment.She had spent her honeymoon travelling through Europe, and according to other accounts was influenced by the clothing worn in Swiss sanatoria, where women were recovering from the effects of tight lacing, and the lack of physical exercise. Shortly afterwards, she went to visit her cousin, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, in Seneca Falls, and Mrs Stanton copied the new costume with immediate delight, feeling as she wore it 'like a captive set free from his ball and chain'.The question is no longer, rags how do you look?But woman, how do you feel?Amelia Bloomer was a neighbour and involved in editing the feminist temperance magazine Lily:At the outset, I had no idea of fully adopting the style; no thought of setting a fashion; no thought that my action would create an excitement throughout the civilized world, and give to the style my name and the credit due to Mrs Miller. This was all the work of the Press. I stood amazed at the furore I had unwittingly created.The circulation of the Lily increased dramatically, and women from all parts of America wrote for details of the pattern. The Times Tunes quoted from Amelia's article in the May issue of Lily under the heading 'A Lady Resolved To Be Free And Easy'; the Illustrated London News published a picture of her in the new costume in July; and soon Bloomers were seen in England: at the Crystal Palace, in Piccadilly, and even on six wax models at Madame Tussauds.		Punch, 1896In February 1853, Amelia Bloomer attracted over 3,000 people to a temperance meeting and the New York Tribune correspondent described the dress which made her famous:Mrs Bloomer was attired in a dark-brown changeable tunic with a kilt descending to just below her knees, the skirt of which was trimmed with rows of black velvet. Her pantaloons were of the same texture and trimmed in the same style. She wore gaiters. Her head-dress was cherry and black. Her dress had a large, open corsage, with bands of velvet over the white chemisette in which was fixed a diamond stud pin. She wore flowing sleeves, tight undersleeves, and black mitts. Her whole attire was both rich and plain in appearance.Most of the dresses were made with loose waists and no whalebone, and this kind of scrupulous attention to style and trimming seems to have been part of a conscious effort to forestall the criticism aroused by something otherwise so unconventional.The Bloomer became notorious, and for the popular press, the topic of the year. Small Staffordshire china figures of Amelia were manufactured; there were at least three farces in West End theatres; a Bloomer polka, waltzes and quadrilles; and the costume was mercilessly lampooned, in Punch and elsewhere, by those who had in the previous months bemoaned instead the stupidity of women's trailing skirts. Satirical cartoons, rhymes and music-hall sketches on role-reversal flourished: Bloomerism in the ballroom, with women asking men to dance, and Bloomered women 'popping the question', joining the police force, or smoking tobacco. This was the exposing of a raw nerve. Victorian society, even more rigidly than our own, believed the separate roles of men and women to be distinctive, and 'complementary '. For a woman to display initiative outside the home, to express opinions, to hope for a measure of independence, or to suggest any of these by the adoption of 'masculine' attire, was to threaten the natural balance of male and female, and with it the whole social structure.As the husband, shall the wife be. He will have to wear a gownIf he does not quickly make her put her Bloomer short coat down.Despite all this, the Bloomer was never intended to appear masculine. The costume of an oriental harem was hardly a suitable source for progressive reform, but trousers or breeches had for so long been worn exclusively by men that they had become the visible symbol of masculine domination. That was why the few women who dared adopt them provoked heated accusations of unwomanliness and gross immodesty. The Bloomer represented a real, though short-lived challenge to the standards of conventional dress, and by implication to the values of contemporary society. It was significant because of the publicity it received; because it became by association a kind of feminist battle dress for women like Sarah and Angeline Grimke, Susan B. Anthony, Lucretia Mott and Lucy Stone; but most of all because it grew out of women's own consciousness of what restricted them and how they might be free.Ironically, these were the very same factors which prevented it from being taken up on a more serious scale.If the Bloomer dress had come from a Pans milliner, it would have been welcomed in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia; but... it is the only dress which has ever been adopted from principle -from a desire in woman to fit herself for daily duty. But in the end, as Elizabeth Cady Stanton observed, the 'tyranny of custom' was so strong,that to escape constant observation, criticism, ridicule, and persecution, one after another gladly went back to the old slavery, and sacrificed freedom of movement to repose. I have never wondered since that the Chinese women allow their daughters' feet to be encased in iron shoes, nor that the Hindoo widows walk calmly to the funeral pyre.The originator of the costume (Elizabeth Smith Miller ) gave it up after six or seven years; and so did Amelia Bloomer, who was sufficiently tired of the expense and inconvenience of keeping up two wardrobes to adopt the crinoline, believing that 'my influence would be greater in the dress ordinarily worn by women than in the one I was wearing'. In various statements she made it quite clear that she was a feminist first and on principle, and a dress reformer second, and for the sake of personal convenience. She wrote:We all felt that the dress was drawing attention from what we thought to be of far greater importance- the question of woman's right to better education, to a wider field of employment, to better remuneration for her labour, and to the ballot for the protection of her rights. In the minds of some people the short dress and woman's rights were inseparably connected. With us, the dress was but an incident, and we were not willing to sacrifice greater questions to it.Long after the Bloomer costume had itself been dropped, a general interest in dress reform continued. The subject was discussed at a convention in Syracuse in 1857, and at the 1868 Council of German Women in Stuttgart, where a motion was passed in favour of a 'reformin dress' which would resist the 'tyranny' and vagaries of fashion'. However, it was not really until the 1870s that there were consistent and organized attempts at reform.By this point there were three separate precedents for an alternative convention: a long tradition of medical invective against tight lacing, which stretched right back (through Rousseau) to German physicians of the mid eighteenth century; the example of the Bloomer costume of 1851/2; and in England the eccentrically picturesque and often quasi-medieval clothing common in some artistic circles, worn particularly by the Pre-Raphaelite women- Christina Rossetti, Elizabeth Siddal, Jane Morris, and Effie Ruskin. A modified version of this sort of clothing, usually a little fussier and more self-conscious, formed the basis of 'Aesthetic Dress', lampooned by Punch and in Gilbert and Sullivan's Patience, and commercially produced by the newly established Liberty's in the later 1870s and 1880s.Meanwhile the fashionable silhouette had itself been changing: the symmetrical crinoline was suddenly abandoned in 1868, and replaced almost immediately by the misleadingly named 'Watteau Toilette'. This demanded a 'Grecian' or 'S'-bend posture from the wearer, the breasts thrust forward, the buttocks pushed back and emphasized with a mass of bunched-up fabric and ribbons. As Stella Mary Newton shows, by the late 1880s the image of woman had becomecompact and smooth as a hedgerow bird and as distinct in outline... her dress... gave no hint of soft flesh beneath, curiously utilitarian. The vulnerable nakedness was compressed into a mould that looked resistant, as the blackbird looks resistant. It was this woman, rather than the melting artistic lady, who really proclaimed, with a cool precision, the victory of her sex.Fashion is here unconsciously reflecting the changing social circumstances of women, whilst simultaneously restricting and inhibiting the individual concerned. Aesthetic dress in its loose floppiness and Liberty prints, although physically liberating, is visually associated with a traditional femininity, whilst the image of fashionable dress implies a new toughness and capability despite its conventionally repressive construction.				Punch, 1896An interest in dress reform continued into the 1880s and 1890s. In England the Rational Dress Society was founded in 1881, as the result of a meeting between Viscountess Harberton and Mrs E. M. King, both of whom were already interested in clothing reform and had written independently on the subject. Lady Barberton herself was firmly in favour of trousers, if necessary in combination with a skirt.The trouser is not only more comfortable, healthy and clean, but also more decent... The prevailing idea of decency, which expose the whole of the upper part of a woman's body for the mere sake of display when she is in full dress, but shrouds her legs in layer upon layer of material is a very strange one, and it is time that it was altered. Let us combine to do this, ladies, and prove to the world that union is strength.In 1883 the Rational Dress Society mounted an exhibition in Piccadilly and contributed to the clothing section of the International Health Exhibition the following year.The couturier worth is supposed to have designed a costume for one of its member consisting of knee breeches and a short full skirt halfway between waist and knee, together with a blouse frilled at neck, wrists and hem. But more typical was the commercial view expressed in a trade journal that 'there is no need for a woman to be able to do more than use her limbs in a feminine fashion'. The aim of the Rational Dress Society was, in contrast, 'to promote the adoption, according to the individual taste and convenience, of a style of dress based upon considerations of health, comfort and beauty and to deprecate constant changes of fashion that cannot be recommended on any of these grounds'.The Society was anxious to emphasize that it advocated a reformed, and not a masculine dress for women. For those who did not wish to adopt divided skirts, divided petticoats were recommended. But even these provoked the Lancet in 1879 into speaking out against 'bifurcated garments'. Medical reformers on the whole had very conventional views about the nature and status of women; though in favour of healthier wives and mothers they could not conceive e of any baste alteration to the status quo.By the 1890s the diffuse influences of Romantic socialism and Kate Greenaway nostalgia contributed to an enthusiasm for picturesque outlines and humble materials, much embellished with hand embroidery. This fashion, although not particularly logical, expressed the mingled socialist and artistic preoccupations peculiar to certain late nineteenth-century circles. The new graceful, healthy and rational dress became the uniform of a wealthy and artistic clique; and rebellion was transformed into style. Perhaps it could be argued that a point had been made, and some degree of relaxation achieved? For the less conventional, possibly; for the followers of high fashion, not at all. Artistic dress was robbed of its power to change, by its adoption as an optional fantasy. Late Victorian and Edwardian corers were as tightly laced as they had ever been. The fashionable Lily Langtry figure was a buxom and artificial 38-18-38. The hobble skirt was still to come.For all the effort, it is hard to say who or what was finally responsible for the end of the corset: the feminists, the doctors, Paul Poiret (for so he claimed), the craze for bicycling, or the First World War. And one further question remains unanswered. If clothes are a useful expression of social rebellion, are they a wise one?Amelia Bloomer was throughout her life an active and influential champion of women's emancipation, but she never considered her clothing a significant part of her political stance, and tactfully switched to skirts when she addressed the Nebraska legislature. Some writers have assumed that her costume gave the cause 'great impetus, and advanced the fulfillment of its aims by many years'; others, that it damaged the furtherance of female suffrage for the rest of the century. Certainly this controversy of ends and means was discussed at the time. Should women (or any other group struggling for social change) adopt the uniform of an 'emancipated' dress, or stay relatively unobtrusive? Was it to be the role of the uniformed soldier, or of the secret agent? Perhaps there was then, and remains now, a need for both.In the photographs that I have seen, the Pankhursts wear fashionable and not 'artistic' or 'rational' clothing. But my own sympathies are with Ada Ballin, who summed up for the opposing viewin1885: 'Tight lacing must be banished from the mind and body of the woman who would ride the iron steed.'She meant the bicycle: but it is quite a good metaphor for life.SR.51, October1976
		Jo Nesbitt, SR 79, February 1979
You Don't Know What is Happening Do You, Mr Jones?LAURA MULVEYTo decapitate = to castrate. The terror of the Medusa is thus a terror of castration that is linked to the sight of something. The hair upon the Medusa's head is frequently represented in works of art in the form of snakes, and these once again are derived from the castration complex. It IS a remarkable fact that, however frightening they may be in themselves, they nevertheless serve actually as a mitigation of the horror, for they replace the penis, the absence of which is the cause of the horror. This is a confirmation of the technical rule according to which a multiplication of penis symbols signifies castration.(Freud, The Medusa's Head)In 1970 Tooth's Gallery in London held a one-man show of sculptures by Allen Jones which gained him the notoriety he now enjoys throughout the women's movement. The sculptures formed a series, called 'Women As Furniture', in which life-size effigies of women, slave-like and sexually provocative, double as hat-stands, tables and chairs. The original of Chair is now in the Dusseldorf home of a West German tycoon, whose complacent form was recently photographed for a Sunday Times article, sitting comfortably on the upturned and upholstered female figure. Not surprisingly, members of women's liberation noticed the exhibition and denounced it as supremely exploitative of women's already exploited image. Women used, women subjugated, women on display: Allen Jones did not miss a trick.Since 1970 Allen Jones's work has developed and proliferated in the same vein. His paintings and sculptures are exclusively images of women. He has won increasing international acclaim, with exhibitions in Italy, Germany, Belgium and the United States, as well as Britain. He is one of the shining properties in the stable of Marlborough Fine Art, the heaviest and most prestige conscious of the international art traders. He has expanded his interests beyond painting and sculpture proper into stage design, coffee-table books, luxury editions, film and television. The Allen Jones artistic octopus extends its tentacles into every nook and cranny where the image of woman can be inserted and spotlighted.At first glance Allen Jones seems simply to reproduce the familiar formulas which have been so successfully systematized by the mass media.His women exist in a state of suspended animation, without depth or context, withdrawn from any meaning other than the message imprinted by their clothes, stance and gesture. The interaction between his images and those of the mass media is made quite explicit by the collection of source material which he has published. Figures is a scrapbook of cuttings, out of magazines, both respectable (Nova, Harpers Bazaar, Life, Vogue, Sunday Times supplement, etc.) and non-respectable (Exotique, Female Mimics, Bound, Bizarre, etc.). There are also postcards, publicity material, packaging designs and film stills (Gentlemen Prefer Blondes, Barbarella, What's New Pussycat?). Projects, his second book, records sketches and concepts for stage, film and TV shows, including Oh Calcutta! and Kubrick's Clockwork Orange (some unfinished) and includes more source material as an indication of the way his idea developed. By publishing these clippings Allen Jones gives vital clues, not only to the way he sees women, but to the place they occupy in the male unconscious in general. He has chosen images which clearly form a definite pattern, which have their own visual vocabulary and grammar. The popular visuals he reproduces go beyond an obvious play on the exhibitionism of women and the voyeurism of men. Their imagery is that of a fetishism. Although every single image is a female form, not one shows the straight female genitals. Not one is naked. 'The cunt (yoni) is always concealed, disguised or supplemented in ways which distract attention from it. The achievement of Allen Jones is to throw an unusually vivid spotlight on the contradiction between woman's fantasy presence and real absence from the male unconscious world. The language which he speaks is the language of fetishism, which speaks to all of us every day, but whose exact grammar and syntax we are usually only dimly aware of. Fetishistic obsession reveals the meaning behind popular images of women.It is Allen Jones's mastery of the language of 'basic fetishist' that makes his work so rich, and compelling. His use of popular media isimportant not because he echoes them stylistically (pop art) but because he gets to the heart of the way in which the female image has been requisitioned, to be re-created in the image of man. The fetishist image of women has three aspects, all of which come across clearly in his books and art objects. First: woman plus phallic substitute. Second: woman minus phallus punished and humiliated, often by woman plus phallus. Third: woman as phallus. Women are displayed for men as figures in an amazing masquerade which expresses a strange male underworld of fear and desire.The nearer the female figure is to nakedness, the more flamboyant the distraction. The only example of frontal nudity in his work, a sketch for Oh Calcutta!, is a history of knickers, well-worn fetishist items, in which the moment of nakedness is further retrieved by the fact that the girls are carrying billiard cues and an enormous phallus is incorporated into the scenery. In the source material, a girl from Playboy caresses a dog's head on her lap; another, on the cover of a movie magazine, clutches an enormous boa constrictor as it completely and discreetly entwines her. Otherwise there is an array of well-known phallic extensions to divert the eye: guns, cigarettes, erect nipples, a tail, whips, strategically placed brooches (Marilyn Monroe and Jane Russell in Gentlemen Prefer Blondes), a parasol, etc., and some, more subtle, which depend on the visual effect of shadows or silhouettes.Women without a phallus have to undergo punishment by fetish objects ranging from right shoes and corsetry, through rubber goods to leather and torture. Here we can see the sadistic aspect of male fetishism, but it still remains fixated on objects with phallic significance. An ambiguous tension is introduced within the symbolism. For instance, a whip can be simultaneously a substitute phallus and an instrument of punishment. Similarly, the high heel on high-heeled shoes, a classic fetishist image, is both a phallic extension and a means of discomfort and constriction. Belts and necklaces, with buckles and pendants, are both phallic symbols and suggest bondage and punishment. The theme of woman bound is one of the most consistent in Allen Jones's source material: at its most vestigial, the limbs of pin-up girls are bound with shiny tape, a fashion model is loaded with chains, underwear advertisements, especially for corsets, proliferate, as do rubber garments from fetishistic magazines. Waists are constricted by tight belts, necks by tight bands, feet by the ubiquitous high-heeled shoe. For the TV show illustrated in Projects Allen Jones exploits a kind of evolved garter of black shin y material round the girls' thighs, which doubles openly, in one case, as a fetter. The most effective fetish both constricts and uplifts, binds and raises, particularly high-heeled shoes, corsets or bras, and, as a trimming, high neck bands holding the head erect.In Projects the theme of punishment can be seen in the abandoned plan for the milkbar in the film of Clockwork Orange (infinitely more subtle in detail than the kitsch design Kubrick finally used for the movie). The waitress is dressed from neck to fingertip to toe in a rubber garment with an apron, leaving only her buttocks bare, ready for discipline, while she balances a tray to imply service. The same theme can be traced in his women as furniture sculptures and, in Figures, the background to these is made clear. Gesture, bodily position and clothing are all of equal importance. Hat Stand is based on the crucial publicity still from Barbarella, which unites boots, binding, leather and phallic cache-sexe, in the image of a girl captive who hangs ready for torture, her hands turned up in a gesture which finally becomes the hat peg. A similar design for an hors-d'oeuvre stand derives from a Vargas drawing of a waitress who sums up the spirit of service and de-personalization.Another aspect of the theme of punishment is that the subject phallus-less woman should suffer spanking and humiliation at the hands of the man-woman, the great male hope. Characterized in Eneg's drawings for Bound (reproduced in Figures) by tight belt, tight trousers, mask and constricted neck (while a female woman carries a soon-abandoned handbag), the man-woman emerges with full force of vengeance in Projects as Miss Beezley in Homage to St Dominic's ('to be played by a 7-foor woman - or a man would do. With 6-inch platform heels "she" would be 18 inches taller than the school "girls"'). And again in The Playroom (another abandoned stage project) where the transvestite owner, 'an elderly "woman"', chases the children. A whole series of paintings show sexually ambiguous images in which a man walks into female clothing to become a woman or male and female legs are locked as one.Finally, in Männer WirKommen, a show for West German Television, which is illustrated in Projects by stills, notes and sketches, Allen Jones adds yet another dimension to his use of fetishistic vocabulary. The close-ups and superimpositions possible on television give him the chance to exploit ambiguities of changed scale and proportion. The spectator is stripped of normal perceptual defences (perspective, normal-size relationships) and exposed to illusion and fantasy on the screen. As sections of the female body are isolated from the whole and shown in close-up, or as the whole body shrinks in size and is super imposed on a blown-up section, Allen Jones develops even further the symbolic references of woman to man and subjects her form to further masculinization.His previous work preserved the normal scale of the female body physically, although it distorted it symbolically, Männer WirKommen contains some imagery of this kind: Homage to Harley uses the motorcycle and the nozzle in their classic roles as phallic extensions, with the women in natural proportion to them (women clad in black bands around their thighs, boots and bound necks). But by far the most striking image is that of the entire figure of one girl, shrunk in scale though symbolically erect, superimposed as a phallic substitute on the tight black shiny shorts of another. A series of freeze-frames from the show, female manikins strategically poised, makes Allen Jones's point blindingly clear.More close-ups in the television sketch carry the female body further into phallic suggestion. Girls supporting a boxing-ring like human pillars have bared breasts divided by a shiny pink material fastened to their necks. A single frame, from breast to neck only, gives the breasts a look of testicles with the pink material functioning as a penis. Female bodies and fragments of bodies are redeployed to produce fantasy male anatomies. A similar emphasis on breasts divided by a vertical motif can be seen in the source material: the torture harness in the Barbarella still, Verushka's single-strap bikini in a fashion photograph. There is a strong overlap between the imagery of bondage and the imagery of woman as phallus built into fetishism. The body is unified to a maximum extent into a single, rigid whole, with an emphasis on texture, stiffness caused by tight clothing and binding, and a general restriction of free movement.In Figures there is a consistent theme of women as automata, with jerking, involuntary, semaphore movements, suggestive of erection of the phallus. These automata often have rhythmic movements (Ursula Andress dancing in a series of stills, like an animated doll, the Rockettes, Aquamaid water-skiers in Florida), uniforms in which the conception of duty and service is combined with strictness and rigidity (for instance, a culling from the Daily Express in which 'Six Model Girls Step Smartly Forward For Escort Duty') and, most important of all, the stiffness induced by wearing tight clothes which constitute a second slithery skin (rubber garments transforming the body into a solid mass from fingertip to toe, one-piece corsets, synthetic garments ranging from Perspex to nylon). An identification develops between the phallus and woman herself. She must be seen in her full phallic glory.To understand the paradoxes of fetishism, it is essential to go back to Freud. Fetishism, Freud first pointed out, involves displacing the sight of woman's Imaginary castration on to a variety of reassuring but often surprising objects - shoes, corsets, rubber goods, belts, knickers, etc. which serve as signs for the lost penis but have no direct connection with it. For the fetishist, the sign itself is the subject of his fantasy- whether actual fetish objects or else pictures or descriptions of them-and in every case it is the sign of the phallus. It is man's narcissistic fear of losing his own phallus, his most precious possession, which causes shock at the sight of the female genitals and the fetishistic attempt to disguise or divert attention from them.A world which revolves on a phallic axis constructs its fears and fantasies in its own phallic image. In the drama of the male castration complex, as Freud discovered, women are no more than puppets; their significance lies purely in their lack of penis and their star turn is to symbolize the castration which men fear. Women may seem to be the subjects of an endless parade of pornographic fantasies, jokes, daydreams, etc., but fundamentally most male fantasy is a closed-loop dialogue with itself, as Freud conveys so well in the quotation about the Medusa's head. Far from being a woman, even a monstrous woman, the Medusa is the sign of a male castration anxiety. Freud's analysis of the male unconscious is crucial for any understanding of the myriad ways in which the female form has been used as a mould into which meanings have been poured by a male-dominated culture.Man and his phallus is the real subject of Allen Jones's paintings and sculptures, even though they deal exclusively with images of women on display. From his work we see how the mass media provide materialfor a 'harem cult' (as Wilhelm Stekel describes the fetishist's penchant for collections and scrapbooks in his classic psycho-analytic study) in which the spectre of the castrated female, using a phallic substitute to conceal or distract attention from her wound, haunts the male unconscious. The presence of the female form by no means ensures that the message of pictures or photographs or posters is about women. We could say that the image of woman comes to be used as a sign, which does not necessarily signify the meaning 'woman' any more than does the Medusa's head: the harem cult which dominates our culture springs from the male unconscious and woman herself becomes its narcissistic projection.Freud saw the fetish object itself as phallic replacement so that a shoe, for instance, could become the object on which the scandalized denial of female castration was fixated. But, on a more obvious level, we could say with Freud in 'The Medusa's Head' that a proliferation of phallic symbols must symbolize castration. This is the meaning of the parade of phallic insignia borne by Allen Jones's harem, ranging from precisely poised thighs, suggestive of flesh and erection, through to enormous robots and turrets. Castration itself is only rarely alluded to in even indirect terms. In one clipping an oriental girl brandishes a large pair of scissors, about to cut the hair of a man holding a large cigar. In another, a chocolate biscuit is described in three consecutive pictures: c'est comme un doigt (erect female finger), avec du chocolat autour(ditto plus chocolate), ça disparait très vite (empty frame) then larger frame and triumphal return, c'est un biscuit: Finger de Cadbury (erect biscuit held by fingers).There is one exception to this: the increasingly insistent theme of women balancing. Female figures hang suspended, at their peak, on the point of coming down (the phallic reference is obvious). Anything balanced upright -a woman walking a tightrope or balancing a tray or poised on the balls of her toes - implies precariously a possible catastrophe that may befall. The sculptures of women as furniture, especially the hat-stand, imply erectness and suspension at the same time, hung motion and hanging in space. In addition, the physical structure of some of his earlier paintings - three-dimensional flights of steps leading steeply up to two-dimensional paintings of women's legs poised on high heels- in itself implies ascending to a point, erect posture and suspension and balance, fused into one image by the illusionistic effect.In his most recent paintings, exhibited this summer at the Marlborough Galleries, Allen Jones develops the theme of balance much further. A number of the paintings are of women circus performers, objects of display and of balance. Here the equation 'woman = phallus' is taken a step further, almost as if to illustrate Freud's dictum that 'the remarkable phenomenon of erection which constantly occupies the human phantasy, cannot fail to be impressive as an apparent suspension of the laws of gravity of the winged phalli of the ancients).' In Bare Me, for instance, the phallic woman, rigid and pointing upwards, holding her breasts erect with her hands, is standing in high-heels on a tray-like board balanced on two spheres. She is on the way up, not down. Loss of balance is possible, but is not immediate.But in other paintings in the same show this confidence is undercut. The defiance of gravity is more flamboyant than convincing. The same devices - high-heels, walking on spheres - which compel an upright, erect posture can also point to its precariousness. In the painting Whip, derived from a brilliant Eneg drawing of two women, castrator and castrated, a woman lassooed by a whipcord is slipping off a three­ legged stool: in the painting we can see only the toppling stool, but there can be no doubt from comparison with the Eneg source, that her real absence- symbolic castration - is intended. In another painting, Slip, both figures from the same Eneg drawing are combined into one and loss of balance becomes the explicit theme. Dancers on points, waitresses carrying trays, women acrobats teetering on high-heels or walking the tightrope- all are forced to be erect and to thrust vertically upwards. But this phallic deportment carries the threat of its own undoing: the further you strive up, the further you may fall.In Männer Wir Kommen the reverse side of the phallic woman, the true horror of the fetishist, can be seen in one startling sequence. The female body, although till bound in a tight corset and with a snake necklace wound round her neck, has a flamboyant, scarlet scar over her genitals. The surrounding mise-en-scène consists of enormous eggs, containing bound women rising from a foetus-like position while, in another sequence, maggot-like women's limbs emerge from equally enormous apples. The scar breeds the putrescene of pregnancy and nothing but decay can come out of the apple. The apple and the egg are the only non-fetishistic images of women to appear in Allen Jones's work. Infested by manikin maggots, they are the eternal companion of the scar.Most people think f fetishism as the private taste of an odd minority, nurtured in secret. By revealing the way in which fetishistic images pervade, not just specialized publications, but the whole of the mass media, Allen Jones throws a new light on woman as spectacle. The message of fetishism concerns not woman, but the narcissistic wound she represents for man. Women are constantly confronted with their own image in one form or another, but what they see bears little relation or relevance to their own unconscious fantasies, their own hidden fears and desires. They are being turned all the time into objects of display, to be looked at and gazed at and stared at by men. Yet, in a real sense, women are not there at all. The parade has nothing to do with woman, everything to do with man. The true exhibit is always the phallus. Women are simply the scenery on to which men project their narcissistic fantasies. The time has come for us to take over the show and exhibit our own fears and desires.SR.8, February 1973
CensoredROZSIKA PARKERThere is increasing media uproar over who the Arts Council chooses to support, but not surprisingly we hear few complaints about the Arts Council's censorship.Press attack on public patronage began in London last summer with Carl Andre's bricks at the Tate Gallery, continued with Mary Kelly's 'Post-Partum Document' at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in October and reached a crescendo the following month with Coum's exhibition 'Prostitution', also at the I C A. Tax payers' money, we were told, was being spent on dirty nappies, Tampax and pornography. Attention was briefly diverted from the cuts and the falling pound by self-righteous articles trivializing the artists' intentions instead of trying to explore the relationship between art and audience. But at least we were able to look at the artists' work and draw our own conclusions. Not so with Suzanne Santoro's art. The Arts Council decided to suppress her book Towards New Expression. Selection is sometimes necessary but on what grounds?The story begins last February, when the organizers of an Arts Council touring exhibition of books made by artists rang Spare Rib. They had been impressed by feminist artist Suzanne Santoro's book and wanted to include it in 'Artists' Books'. Could we supply her address?Soon afterwards Suzanne, an American living in Rome, received a letter saying that her book was wanted for the show and the organizers 'must have five copies by mid February'.Suzanne was in England when 'Artists' Books' opened at the I CA in August. Arriving at the exhibition, she noted that her book was entered in the catalogue as Number 103. She browsed through the show - out of the 119 books by individual artists, only ten were by women- but she couldn't find her book. There was no Number 103. Her work had been excluded though it had originally been selected and entered in the catalogue.Suzanne's sparse, carefully produced, black and white volume was published by the Italian women's liberation group Rivolta Feminile. Suzanne is one of a number of women artists whose work is based on images of women's genitals. For example there's Ann Severson's film Near the Big Chakra, and Judy Chicago's work in paint and porcelain.For most feminists vaginal imagery signifies a rejection of images by men of women, and an exploration and affirmation of their own identity. It attacks the idea of women's genitals as mysterious, hidden and threatening, and attempts to throw off a resulting shame and secrecy. Suzanne begins by demonstrating the way women's genitals have been portrayed in the history of art – 'annulled, smoothed down and in the end idealized'.Suzanne established herself as an artist in the 1960s. Her art was taken seriously, she was professionally successful. 'I built huge things out of rope. I did a lot of heavy, difficult sculpture. I worked with sheet metal and things like that,' she says, 'then I got involved with feminism - with a group called Rivolta Feminile. For three years we talked about sex.'It was 1970. In Italy the debate over vaginal and clitoral orgasm was well underway. Suzanne reacted as a person working with shape and form: 'I had never really looked at myself, so I decided to take a cast of myself. We were learning how important it was for women to know how they were made. I took a cast and I was amazed by the structural solidity of it - the very precise construction and form.'She went on to photograph genitals and in Towards New Expression she juxtaposes the photographs with illustrations of flowers and shells. The photos are a refined examination of structure, desexualized and isolated in the centre of a blank page.She carefully points out that the juxtaposition of flowers, shells and genitals is not intended to confirm the old identification of women with nature as against culture. She writes: 'The placing of the Greek figures, the flowers and the conch shell near the clitoris is a means of understanding the structure of the female genitals.' And she adds: 'I just wanted to make the point that I had found structural identities, nor symbolic identities.'In The Second Sex Simone de Beauvoir underlines the importance of knowing the structure: 'The feminine sex organ is mysterious even to the woman herself... Woman does not recognize herself in it and this explains in large part why she does not recognize its desires as hers.'Similarly, Suzanne sees demystification as a prerequisite for sexual self-expression: 'The placing of the flowers and the conch shell near the clitoris... is also an invitation for the sexual self-expression that has been denied women till now', and which, she believes, leads to greater self-knowledge in other areas of our lives. 'Expression begins with self-assertion and the awareness of the difference between ourselves and others.'By 'expression' she means creative or artistic self-expression. The whole book condemns the image of women in art which damages our ability to see ourselves as creative people. The female nude- passive, available, devoid of individual desires, her body a blank canvas for men's creativity- is a major subject of an in our culture. And it's easy to take the image at face value and believe we're destined to be always the model and never the maker. Suzanne concludes: 'We can no longer see ourselves as if we live in a dream or an imitation of something that just does not reflect the reality of our lives.'In Italy Suzanne's work has been widely exhibited and discussed. Some women feel that isolating a woman's genitals confirms the split between sexuality and other social relations. Others feel that we have been identified for too long by our biology, and even though Suzanne is using a biological natural imagery to criticize the way we've been perceived in the past, it's dangerously open to misunderstanding.She has received criticism but never censorship. Spare Rib asked the Arts Council why they'd suppressed Towards New Expression. 'On the grounds that obscenity might be alleged,' replied Director of Art Robin Campbell. 'We are willing to defend obscenity on the grounds of artistic excellence but considered that in this case the avowed intention of the book was primarily a plea for sexual self-expression.'But if it was not considered artistically excellent, why, we wonder, was it selected for the show in the first place? And what sort of 'obscenity' is the Arts Council prepared to defend? The answer is women used, women subjugated, women on display - in other words, Allen Jones's Projects, which did appear in 'Artists' Books'.. . . Some years ago Suzanne said, 'As a child I used to go to bed and pinch myself to feel if I was alive. Am I real? That feeling of not being, not living a full enough life is still with me. I think it's a female thing.' Her recent experience at the hands of the Arts Council must have increased her feeling of 'not being' but it's certainly shown the subversive quality of works like hers.SR.54, January 1977SR.58, May1977
A Day in the Life of ... Janice... When Ben can't find clean socks which are staring him in the eye or flounders helplessly in front of a cooker, I have caught myself thinking, 'Men, they are useless when it comes to looking after themselves'- and up pop images of the wise, motherly wife and the rather silly husband - images employed again and again in advertisements.. I think women in the home are particularly vulnerable to role suggest ion, because they are not interacting with the outside world in a work situation where they would have to assert their personality and forge some sort of separate identity for themselves. This is how I feel, anyway, and because of that vulnerability am happier not watching much television...SR.65, January 1978Disabled WomenANNA BRIGGS INTERVIEWS MURIEL... Muriel is in her fifties, and is wheelchair-bound with severe arthritis... 'People are peculiar about the disabled -they think we don't have emotions and feelings like them, that we don't fall in love. Eighteen years ago, when we married (we both had disabilities then) people would say: "What are you getting married for?” My husband was mild-mannered, and would get upset, but I would throw their dirty minds back at them: "Why do you think?" People invade your privacy in a way they wouldn't with a non-disabled person. But the disabled are now fighting back - especially in the last ten years.'...SR. 8o, March 1979Speaking Out on AgePAULINE LONG... Women who understand my feelings will know how angry I am.. . . Ageism is the assumption that older people are not real people: not only are their needs fewer, and in some important areas such as sexuality, non-existent; but it is considered that their experience is of little account and is to be avoided. Given the chance, older people will get boring about the past. In fact, older people are O K if they are dead, since death gives the 'in' generation a chance to look at and evaluate their work in an historical context. In addition, contact - that is, real contact - with older people is feared because they mirror in their changing looks the common condition of humanity- a tendency to get older. This equates with less beautiful, less strong, and ultimately with death. Death is something that must always happen to others, and must not be allowed to impinge on a personal consciousness. Any contact with age, experience and death is therefore to be shunned.. . . Today in Britain women have an average of fifteen to twenty years between post-menopause and death. The period is lengthening all the time. Nobody knows what 'to do' with such women. Experienced, survivors, skilled, healthy, energetic and beautiful. There is no place for them in our society. And in the women's movement? The answer was made by a younger woman. When I first thought of going into a women's group she encouraged me: but I demurred because of my age (fifty). She said: 'We can learn from you and you can learn from us.' I came in, and she was right. Let hers be the last words.SR.82, May 1979Put a Her in Your HertzANNA COOTESister, if you ever rent a car from Hertz (though women, of course, are seldom in a position to do so) I sincerely hope you will rent it from one of their male representatives and that you will have a button missing from your coat.Let me explain. You may have been lucky enough to miss the Hertz advertisement which appears in the national press occasionally. It shows a slightly balding man standing by a blackboard. In front of him are three young girls in mini skirts, listening attentively and taking notes. He is pointing to words on the blackboard which say: 'Hertz says Yes!' Beneath the picture is a slogan: 'Teaching a girl about Hertz is teaching her to say Yes'. Beneath that, the smaller print declares:Before every new Hertz girl meets her public, she has to learn to always say Yes to a customer.It's easy when you work for Hertz because there's no limit to what Hertz has, to offer. In fact, it takes us six weeks to fill her pretty head with all the facts and figures.What we don't spell out in the book, we know a Hertz girl can handle naturally. We choose her because she's the kind of girl who enjoys solving all the little things that don't seem very little at the time.Yes, I'II phone your wife to tell her you'II be late.Yes, I'II find the briefcase you left in the car.Yes, I'll sew the button on your coat.The next time you want to rent a car, ask a Hertz girl. You'II see how well she's learned her lessons.If this has reduced you to spluttering fury, you'll understand why our women's group decided we couldn't let it go by without registering a protest.So we wrote two letters: one to the Guardian, which featured the ad regularly, and one to Hertz. We told them we took the strongest possible exception to the advertisement and detailed our grievances: (1) the sexual overtones of 'teaching her to say Yes'; (2) the patronizing implication that the Hertz girl is so stupid it takes six weeks to 'fill her pretty head', while she needs to have a totally facile concept spelled out on a blackboard; and (3) the reinforcement of the misconception that women are best suited for job s of a servile nature. We asked the Editor of the Guardian whether he would include such ads in future. We asked the Managing Director of Hertz whether men were employed in the same job and, if so, whether they were given the same training. Ten of us signed each letter.One week later we received a letter from G. P. Taylor, Advertising Director of the Guardian. He had taken the trouble to write us two pages, which made me suspect he hadn't been inundated with letters like ours. 'I understand', he said, 'why you rake this exception and I have a great deal of sympathy with your point of view'; the Guardian probably would include such advertisements in future; it was not their policy to censor advertising. 'We believe that the advertiser should be free to advertise what he has to sell and say what he has to say within the limits of the law.' He apologized for causing us offence.A week after that, we received a letter from Robin Crawshaw, Managing Director of Hertz. Dear Ladies, he said, he could not agree with our criticism and he wished to make these observations:1. It is complete nonsense to suggest that the advertisement had any sexual overtones.2. Our girls are in fact pretty, they are not dumb and the campaign slogan can only be conveyed effectively by emphasizing the kind of service we expect a rental representative to perform.3. With regard to your comment that sewing on buttons is a servile duty, I cannot agree at all. In fact, what we offer is nothing more than a helpful service to the desperate business man who is unlikely to carry needle and thread with him.				Susie CourtauldAs to whether men are employed as representatives, the answer is yes. However, as far as I know, we do not employ any young ladies as mechanics or car washers, so perhaps we do succumb to the traditional 'misconception' that there are certain jobs for which our charming Hertz ladies are less well suited than their male counterparts.In short, I believe that your objections are totally without foundation.See what I mean? Get the Hertz boy to sew up the neck of the boss's stuffed shirt while he's got his needle out...SR.8, February 1973
'What Offends One of Us Won't Offend the Next Chap': The Advertising Standards Authority's Line on SexismJILL NICHOLLS AND PAT MOANI am alone in the underground waiting for a train. All around me are huge images of female parts: giant rubber peach-tone breasts, wet lips, denim bums, damp-looking stomachs, long legs in high-heels ('Hundreds of women take them off for us every day'). I don't know where to look that doesn't make me feel angry or vulnerable. A man comes into the tunnel and looks me up and down. All these ads are like his gang- telling him I am a cunt-thing, a leg-thing, a breast-thing and that I am waiting for him. He is psyched up to think that he has a right to me. (The Lovable bra ad, his hand resting lightly but oh so firmly on her naked waist- his territory.)My mother used to say it was a great relief to her being an old woman because men left her alone. So I am careful to conceal my youth, never to look like those ads. When it is hot I don't wear shorts because it isn't safe: I become a leg-thing. Even in a T-shirt one becomes a tit-thing, ogled, mocked, prodded. Winter means armour of boots, coat, hat and relative safety, but there are no summer clothes behind which to hide your body…The Advertising Standards Authority, 'editors of our streets' as they see themselves, hotly deny that sexist images are a general representation of women. They don't have anything to do with us, now do they? As they say in their letter rejecting the complaint against Wells 'juicy, fruity, fresh and cheap' orange juice ad, it 'plainly was not making a statement about women in general, or seeking to suggest to any individual woman who saw the poster that she was required to identify herself with the woman depicted in it'.But even if you don't identify yourself with those ads, men do. Advertising is an incredibly powerful agent of male supremacy, a fact which the AS A glosses over with platitudes like 'You have your views and other people have theirs.' Of course we have our views but the advertisers have the power and pay a fortune to buy space to push their products. The rest of us are left speechless.'I stand in the underground station coming to work in the morning with the pictures on the wall of girls in bathing costumes. Extremely pretty girls. And I stand there and I enjoy them thoroughly. I come into the office and there's a letter of complaint about the very advertisement that I'd been enjoying,' says Tony Painter, deputy director of the AS A. 'That just prove the point that we've all got our own views. What offends one of us won't offend the next chap.'Geoffrey Williams, new boy at the AS A, is sure that a lot of men 'really like lascivious advertising'. Pushed, he does admit that the use of women in ads reflects their position in society (it may not seem much but it sounded really advanced during our interview in their boardroom!). But the A S A, not a government body but the self-policing arm of the advertising industry, financed by a 0.1 per cent surcharge on display advertising, is obsessed with antiquated notions of 'taste and decency' which are totally defined by what they conceive majority views to be, based of course on their own.The AS A waits for complaints to come in, rather than taking initiatives themselves, though they do pre-vet ads in certain areas - cigar­ cues and slimming a ids for instance. They cover only press and poster advertising- cinema, TV and radio are not their responsibility.The council of twelve members appointed by the chairman, himself appointed by the advertising industry, considers complaints behind closed doors. They meet once a month to decide on cases prepared for them by a secretariat (nearly forty-strong) which services both the ASA and the Code of Advertising Practice (CAP) Committee, a trade association to which most advertisers and publications belong. The CAP committee writes the code - with its empty call for ads to be 'legal, decent, honest and truthful', whatever that means and the AS A supervises its implementation.Asked about their criteria on sexism, which fits only under their umbrella of 'decency', Painter said, 'Really you're asking me to read the minds of the council and that's very difficult for me to do... They're just like everybody else, you've got a group of twelve ordinary people making these judgements. You get another group of twelve and they might take a different view- it's the name of the game.'Just like everybody else? The A S A boast that two thirds of the council have no connection with advertising and so 'our independence is assured by the independence of the member of the council, who have no axe to grind.' What's more- 'they come from all walks of life' and three are 'ladies'. Yes, there are MPs, company directors, lords, a vicar, even the Baroness of Fulham (just an ordinary housewife?).They're proud too that their members are answerable to no one -'We don't want representatives, we want ordinary people, people who make their own judgements.'In the case of the Wells ad, which received, they say, about twenty complaints, a lot by AS A standards, Painter said: 'The majority of the council didn't think that the words could logically apply to the caricature of the woman.' One of the arguments was that although the words could apply to the woman, 'they could equally well apply to the orange juice'! (Who was talking about logic??)The fact that the drawing was stylized loomed large for the council ­ quite why escaped us. They seem to see style and humour as a thing apart from the 'content' or 'meaning' of an ad, which they take clod­ hoppingly literally. Asked if they'd ever had any complaints about sexual imagery in ads - phallic symbolism (foaming champagne bottles), masturbation scenes like in the Rothmans ad where the uniformed arm reaches for the gear lever - they looked slightly shocked and said, 'No. Well yes. Doubtless from time to time but I can't recall having one. But then I've only been here a short time.' Judging by their response to Wells, the chances of such complaints being under­ stood is pretty low. They can spot a nude when they see one and disapprove, but don't delve much deeper - though they do claim to know the difference between feminist objections to the exploitation of women and puritanical revulsion at nudity as such.Job ads that are overtly sex discriminatory ('Girl Friday wanted') are relatively easy to deal with because they break the law. Painter points out that Britain's race relations legislation is stronger than that on sex discrimination, which has nothing comparable to the clause about not 'inciting to racial hatred'.) Ads like those for Green Shield stamps that idealize women as housewives and insist on our role within the family as carers, consumers and dependants, are not illegal - or indecent - they're just sexist, and that doesn't count.Factual complaints they find easier to deal with (if an ad promises 90 per cent beef when the stuff's made of soya), so we asked about another kind of 'misleading claim'- you'll get a boyfriend if you use this deodorant cleanser hair-remover: buy this and he'll buy you.'The question the council would ask itself is whether a significant number of girls would be silly enough to believe it,' says Painter. So if you're influenced you're silly, if you're not it's a bad ad. And how can women not be influenced by the messages screamed from all sides?Though Painter 'can't remember' a complaint on grounds of sexism being upheld, writing to the A S A is not an utter waste of time. In the case of Wells, which they insist was 'a borderline case', each complaint was passed on to the company and the effect of that is 'to deter Wells from using the same ad again', according to Painter. Unless a complaint is considered too 'trivial' to pursue, they publish the results of their investigations - for or against - in a monthly report, sent out to consumer agencies and the media- this includes the name of company and product and is considered bad publicity. If an advertiser refuses to change an ad against which a complaint has been upheld, the AS A can ask the media not to accept it. As a last resort it could recommend that the advertiser's trading privileges be withdrawn. In any event they do assume that for every complaint they receive, 100 to 1,000 other people are also offended who didn't bother to write. Diplomatically perhaps, they kept urging us to test the system and see how they handle anti-sexist complaints: 'It's difficult to criticize the system if it's not being used, isn't it- you ought to try it out.'				Thalia DoucasIf everyone who sent a cutting to Spare Rib's 'Tooth and Nail'- on average two or three a day - or slapped a sticker on some hideous poster, also dashed off a note to the AS A, they'd be overwhelmed!However, they are sticky about defining how 'representative' opinions are (ironically, given their own constitution). The code is meant to reflect 'the prevailing view of the population of the UK'. They ask if an ad will 'offend the majority of people who will see it...We may get a dozen complaints about a particular ad or poster and immediately a new question arises: how representative are these complaints?' Sometimes they are prepared to withdraw an ad if a 'minority' is deeply offended - for instance a Smirnoff vodka ad which made a joke about the Titanic (because it upset relatives of those who drowned) and a Japanese car ad which mentioned Hiroshima.But angry women don't get this special treatment.Affirm is a feminist alliance against ads, articles and images that exploit women. Its aim is, simply, to abolish all sexism in the media. As well as using traditional ways of campaigning- writing to the AS A and to TV and radio stations, monitoring newspapers and writing letters to the editor - the women involved also try to work out more imaginative methods. They support direct action, sell stickers and badges and are preparing an action kit for the enraged woman! They're willing to speak at schools, colleges and conferences, and plan to hold a conference of their own in the autumn.Affirm, they feel, has a huge consciousness-raising function: 'We try to get behind the ads, showing how media images interrelate with a whole ideology. People get used to sexism, they aren't shocked any more. There's a lot of emphasis in ads on the possession of women - this relates to violence against women, because if men can't have the women they're offered, they take.'Affirm meets fortnightly in London and functions as a contact point for individuals around the country. It's eager to form new groups and hear from more women.We have had reports of individual women dreaming up schemes on their own...one woman even thought of sticking pins in Wells plastic orange squash bottles in supermarkets (illegal of course).If you're caught spraying- or tearing down or subverting posters with stickers-sentences can be heavy. You're treated as any ordinary vandal­ political motivation seems to come into it only if used against you! If you do get caught, cash in on the publicity. When Diane Potter and Maria Schween were tried in London recently for 'defacing property' - posters for The Stud and Emmanuelle- crowds of women picketed the court and the story made all the local papers.Even if the ad-men are dreaming up ways to incorporate our protests-like the Brook Street ad with leg in plaster cast, complete with empty space just inviting passers-by to scrawl a message- graffiti are still one small way of making our voice heard. Any more suggestions?S.R.72, July 1978
Suffrage PostersPAULA HARPERThe posters made by members of the women's suffrage movement in the US A and Great Britain between 1900 and 1920 have an unexpected, and perhaps dubious, distinction. Since most of them predate the First World War, they are among the earliest manifestations of a new phenomenon in the twentieth century: the political picture poster.The suffragists used the format of the advertising posters surrounding them, but they were the first group to adapt this commercial art form, with its dilutions of fine art styles, to a political function. They set the precedent which was quickly followed on a massive scale by the makers of official government propaganda posters during the First World War.The graphic heirs of the First World War posters are in the style of the 'paid political announcement' which now dominates posters and billboards; images created by professional teams of commercial artists, market researchers and public relations experts. But the suffrage posters were made by convinced individuals with no commercial motives, they supported an anti-establishment cause, and were directed to an audience which did not care so much about art as about the issues.The posters were published either privately or by local or national women's organizations, among them the National Woman Suffrage Association in New York (N A W SA) and in London by the Women's Social and Political Union (W S P U), the Artists' Suffrage League and the more conservative Women's Franchise League.The nineteenth-century suffragists Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucy Stone, had made an assault on the ideas and institutions taken for granted by middle-class Americans. They challenged the sanctity of marriage and the family, the roles and responsibilities of men and women as defined by the Scriptures and the privileges due to the 'weaker sex'. In response, the anti-suffragists defined and supported these ideas and institutions more explicitly than ever before. From the turn of the century, when the period of practical action to achieve the vote began and the suffragists found that persuasive techniques were politically necessary to win friends and influence the electorate, they developed new arguments to rebut the anti-suffragist position without undermining traditional ideas about relationships between the sexes. The posters adopt a similar strategy.For example, 'Give Mother the Vote - We Need It' is a defensive poster, designed to counter a common theme in anti-suffrage literature and imagery; the antithesis between a woman's natural function as directed by the Scriptures, the bearing and rearing of children, and her taking part in political life. Voting would be a burden for a busy mother; it would create dissension in the home, competition between men and women and bring an end to chivalry which was a refining influence on men. Only ugly women watered political power because they could wield no influence through their charms. The rebuttal to this argument was proposed by Jane Addams in an article, 'WhyWomen Should Vote', which first appeared in the Ladies Home Journal in 1909. She urged women to use the ballot to preserve the home, by electing governments which would provide clean milk, sanitary surroundings and good education for their families in the new urban environment. She pointed out that the farm woman could assume personal responsibility for the safety and cleanliness of the milk from her own cow but that in the cities, mothers were dependence on the community for such services. Women's traditional responsibilities were education and the protection of children; they must bring their superior spiritual forces to bear on a materialistic world. A woman must, wrote Jane Addams, even though it was an extra burden, 'bring herself to the use of the ballot'. Many posters emphasized this motivation. Images of motherly suffragists who gently asked for the vote in order to provide better homes for their families offered an analgesia to the anti-suffrage forces and soothed masculine misgivings.An anti-suffrage article by George Holland in the Sewanee Review of 1909 predicted that if the suffragists were successful in gaining the ballot, all women would in time become 'large-handed, big-footed, flat­ chested and thin-lipped'. These unfeminine characteristics were often used by caricaturists to satirize feminists. A long tradition of popular prints from the fifteenth century to the cartoonists from Punch and Life in the early twentieth century mocked the 'over-emancipated' woman by picturing her as stringy, angular and sexless or as self-satisfied and matronly with an enormous, overwhelming bosom and bottom. Role reversal is a common caricatural device in this tradition; men are shown caring for the squalling baby, cleaning and washing up, while the women laze about, congregate in saloons, smoke cigars or write novels. The pro-suffrage poster artists countered with images of the 'Womanly' woman, whose sources in the history of art were traditional madonna or classical goddess types. These images, in general, suppressed the sexual characteristics of woman and presented her as a creature some­ where between a nun and a nineteenth-century goddess.The style of posters as well as their content, carries the message. The 'how' is part of the 'what'. The choice of a style for the suffrage posters which communicated to the right public with the right voice was a crucial part of the process of making them.The poster artists for Women's Suffrage seem to have chosen styles appropriate to their intentions. In general they followed the stylistic tradition of persuasive art by using modes of either illusionism or stylized realism. But unlike most political poster makers they drew inspiration from the romantic Pre-Raphaelite and decorative Art Nouveau styles. These styles influenced commercial art and the design of home furnishings and arts and crafts even into the 1920s, but they were generally considered unsuitable for political posters. The Pre­ Raphaelite and Art Nouveau styles have this advantage, however; they romanticize women. They are 'feminine' styles not created by women but carrying connotations of what constitutes femininity from a masculine point of view. Posters in these styles were designed to counteract anti-suffrage images which showed women as aggressive harridans.The suffrage posters are also influenced by magazine and book illustration, an intentionally 'innocent' and even 'cute' style. The colours of the posters tend to be pastel, the lines pliant; the emphatic colour contrasts and aggressive forms of most twentieth-century political posters are avoided.The posters, by their peculiar lack of forcefulness, their gentility and timidity, visually illustrate the dilemma of the suffragists. They wanted political power and freedom from an oppressive social status but hesitated to part with their traditional sexual identity (even though it was one which had been defined by men), perhaps for fear of being left sexless.The women who made the posters faced this problem in concrete terms; they had no tradition of image-making to draw upon except the masculine one in which they were embedded as second-class citizens. This tradition did not serve them; it provided few images of women except male-created ones. The poster artists could only make a selection from this available tradition and fit the suffragist image, more or less uneasily, into it. The Pre-Raphaclite woman was graceful, elegant, idolized, and above all, ladylike. It was an image which connoted sexual and social privilege and with which, most probably, many of the suffragists found it pleasant to identify. But was it a self-image which, once adopted, may have impeded the suffragists from clearly challenging a political system which denied women equality in exchange for giving them privilege, and a social system which emphasized the superiority of an educated cultivated minority? In other words, if one wishes to oppose the status quo, can one use the artistic conventions acceptable to that status quo without self-contamination? A conviction that one cannot is behind the present-day search of many women artists for new forms and content- new self-images- which are truly their own and not selected or modified from available, primarily masculine, tradition. But the suffragists looked into the Mirror of Art and believed they saw themselves. This belief may have conditioned not only the style of their posters but their style of political action.The differences between posters produced in Great Britain and the United States seem to reflect the differences in the political realities and the ideology of suffragists in the two countries. On the whole the British posters tend to be more aggressive than the American, occasionally on the attack rather than on the defensive. In England, militancy was greater and reaction stronger. The British posters, like the American, mainly addressed themselves to a well-educated, middle- class audience. However, there are some English posters which plead the special cause of working-class women, a group almost totally ignored in the American suffrage movement.The British posters also seem to place far more stress on the intellectual achievements and professional accomplishments of women and less on the importance of motherhood and 'womanly nature'. The anonymous poster 'Polling Station probably refers to a parade held in London on 13 June 1908, in which 13,000 women marched in groups; professional women, university graduates, artists, writers and actresses among them. Homemakers brought up the rear of this parade and motherhood has been treated with some ambivalence by the poster designer. The mother is shown front and centre- the most important figure in the placement- but her position of bending down to the child lowers her in relation to the erect figures of the professional women flanking her on both sides.Aileen Kraditor in her book Ideas of the Women's Suffrage Movement 1890-1920notes that up into the 1890s the suffrage movement in the US A was educational, basing its appeal on the equality of men and women and on the justice of suffrage for both. But as the movement took on a more activist stance, new and more politically sophisticated arguments were introduced, based not on 'justice' but on 'expediency'. Suffragists campaigning in northern cities, for example, pointed out that the male, lower-class, immigrant vote could be outbalanced by the female, middle-class, 100 per cent American vote. These tactics led to less emphasis on the principle of equality, in contrast to the British poster of 1908 'Justice Demands the Vote' which pleads the simple fairness of suffrage for women.But British poster makers were willing to use arguments based on 'expediency' also. 'Polling Station' shows distinguished professional women outside a voting place which is being freely entered by a motley crew of males. The appeal of this poster and also of 'Convicts, Lunatics and Women Have No Vote' of 1901 is based on the superiority of the educated woman to some men and the loss to society of the benefit of her contribution to government. The idea for 'Convicts, Lunatics and Women Have No Vote' is in fact taken from a postcard-sized photomontage which was widely circulated in the United States in the 1890s (American Woman and Her Political Peers'). In the centre of this curious image the refined and respectable face of Frances Willard, President of the International Women's Christian Temperance Union, appears. In the four corners are representatives of the other groups in American society who also cannot vote: clockwise from upper left, the congenital idiot, the lunatic and the Indian. The message, however, is certainly not that male Indians and idiots should be allowed to vote.The women's posters showed a decided reluctance to attack and caricature the opposition. If the little boys in the poster 'Now you greedy boys I shall not give you anymore until I have helped myself', for example, had been shown as grossly fat and ugly as well as aggressively greedy (the way Gillray might have pictured them and the mother obviously undernourished and needy, the poster would carry its message with more force and clarity. This Lack of audacity may account for the missing theme in the posters of the women's suffrage movement. There are no attacks on men.In other visual propaganda campaigns by politically insurgent groups fighting dominant groups (the Protestants versus the Catholics in the sixteenth century, the Republicans against the Monarchists in nineteenth-century France, and the Socialists versus Capitalists in the later nineteenth and twentieth centuries, for example) the enemy was always specifically defined and clearly attacked through mockery, exaggeration of his animal or sub-human nature, or by associating him with the devil or satanic powers. But where, for example, is the suffragist poster depicting a monstrous male with his cruelly booted heel grinding down on the neck of the voteless, helpless female? Not to be found. The poster makers for women's suffrage avoid attacking men in favour of presenting a positive image of women. Perhaps it was distasteful to women to lose dignity by admitting their oppression. Perhaps they feared losing advantages they already had. Perhaps there was a natural reluctance on the part of the weaker half of the human race to define the stronger half as the enemy. It was only men after all who could give women the vote; posters which antagonized them were apparently not believed to be good political strategy.In the First World War posters made at almost the same time (mostly by men), women are cast in another role. They are shown as strong, capable, engaged in manual labour, in heroic 'masculine' poses or as powerful allegorical figures. The contrast between the timid, self-deprecating woman in 'Won't you let me help you John?' and the glamorous operetta heroine in the poster for the National League for Women's Service of the First World War is startling. Which image helped win the vote for women? The result (if not the aim) of both kinds of propaganda was the same; to convince men that women were harmless, that they would not threaten the social status quo and that they believed in and would work for the same ends as men. Women's efforts in the First World War substantiated this. Patriotism and the 'americanization' of aliens were specific war aims of N A W SA.Without the proof women gave in the First World War that they could make a contribution to the national war effort it is doubtful that they would have received the vote, either in the US A or in Britain. The campaign of the British suffragists resulted in partial victory in 1919, when university graduates over thirty, women householders and householders' wives over thirty were granted the vote. Full suffrage on an equal basis with men did not come until 1928. In the U S A all women citizens over twenty-one were given the vote in 1920.As it turned out, women were harmless. The vote was conceived of as an end, not a means to an end, by most suffragists, and after winning it women rarely used it to their own advantage.SR.41, November 1975
FAMILYThe ultimate source of pleasure, fulfillment and sense of social usefulness for women is meant to lie in their role in the family. This role as homemaker is more insular and the emotional responsibilities more intense than they were before industrialization. As work and home have become more separate, so other responsibilities of the family, like education and health, now belong to the stare. The home has become a refuge from work, a sanctuary from the rest of the world. Woman's role as keeper of this sanctuary was described by Michelene Wandor in an early issue of Spare Rib:Her functions are distinct but often simultaneously demanded of her so that she has to be an actress switching deftly from role to role; mother to baby, mother to husband, psychologist and teacher to baby, pupil to husband. Somewhere within this labyrinth is her 'self' if only she can find it. The odds on her finding it are minimal, since she never makes the choice of which role she is playing. That is always determined by either her husband or her children, or both in conflict with each other. (SR.5)This stress has contributed to the breakdown of the nuclear family reflected in divorce statistics and the increase in single-parent families.We do need the close relationships, the tenderness, care and empathy which we seek from the family. However, in the nuclear family women not only experience loss of identity and isolation, but are legally and economically dependent on the husband as breadwinner and head of the household. This inequality and the nuclear family itself are upheld by state policy on housing, in education, in the system of welfare provision and in the processes of the law.Women's work in the family includes the bearing and nurturing of children and housework. Yet women today have fewer children, spend a reduced proportion of their lives in childrearing and often return to work while they are still involved in childcare. As women have gained a measure of independence they have had to face the contradiction of their status as legally and financially dependent. This has highlighted women's criticisms of their role in the nuclear family. Within the family itself, women have questioned the male assumptions of control and ownership, described by one woman in an interview in Spare Rib: 'See, it's like jumping out of the frying pan into the fire when you get married; you might as well go back to being fifteen again and have to ask your bloody parents every time you want to go out.' But the independence of earning a wage that is less than a man's is limited: 'There's always somebody that you have to justify yourself to and when you go home to that you know that it's like Cinderella; you were only pretending to be free for the evening' (SR.76). Feminists have argued that women's biological capacity to bear children should not be used to justify confining women to the maternal role or to domestic work.Some women have consciously sought alternatives to the nuclear family in collective or communal households, not only for a more equal sharing of the practical work but for closer relationships with women, or more equal and mutually supportive relationships between men and women, or for sharing childcare. But the past bears down on the present and changing the way 'we live does not automatically release us from patterns of feeling learned within the nuclear family in the first place. The psychic upheaval which can be involved in trying to change those relationships shows that the private world of the family and the public world of work are not completely separate. The family helps to shape the world outside it. The way we learn our gender identity and our psychological development are linked to the form of our family life, to the authority of the father and especially to women's primary role in mothering. Lisa Vine commented on the significance of understanding the mother-child bond and a woman's identity as a mother when she reviewed the film Riddles of the Sphinx in Spare Rib:The 'real' world of unions, work, campaigning for a nursery, do not always seem in touch with her central problems, The former have their place in the patriarchal world, whereas the silent mysteries of a woman's life at home, in the house alone with her child, are unvoiced both in the real' world and to herself: only, it seems, in women's collective identity is the silence beginning to break. (SR.59)1 Sally Alexander, 'The Night Cleaners", Red Rag No. 62 Peggy Caserta, Going Down with Janis------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Contents		vIntroduction		16Image		62