bed I knelt down and said my prayers, something I had not done for a long time. Then I got between the sheers and cried myself to sleep.While I was working at this house, the cook sold Mum two wicker armchairs, padded round the sides and covered in cretonne patterned with large red roses. I remember them well: they creaked enough to wake the house whenever they were sat in. I gave the cook five shillings for a kimono, a kind of Japanese dressing gown. I really needed other things first but just couldn’t resist that lovely piece of luxury: it was made of crinkly material, had a pattern of a dragon on the back and wide sleeves trimmed in white.I eventually left the job in the house on Richmond Hill, or rather I got the sack. I must admit that what I did to cause my dismissal was silly. Instead of taking Peter for his usual walk, I took him home to see my young brother, and when he told the mistress he had been to where I lived, she gave me a week’s notice on the spot. The trouble was that while he was playing in the field at the back of our house, he fell and cut his knee and had to have it bandaged with a piece of white rag. And to make things worse, he messed up his jacket. I told Mum about it when I went home on my next half-day, and she said, ‘Who the devil does she think she is? If he grows up half as strong as you lot, she won’t have much to worry about. Playing in a bit of dirt never hurt anyone­ he’s got to eat a peck before he dies.’...SR.44, March 1976
Against the ‘Gentlemen of Justice’: Portuguese Cleaners UniteNEWS FEATURE‘At the moment we are in the forefront of the struggle for women’s rights in Portugal.’ Sophia Ganhao of the Domestic Workers’ Union was speaking in London in March. ‘All our struggle is based in the fight for the rights of domestic workers, but as such it is also a struggle for the liberation of women.’In the summer of 1974 there was a wave of occupations of workplaces abandoned or threatened with closure by frightened owners. One that women took over was a laundry in Lisbon. They told Officina Samba, a left-wing paper, that they wanted ‘to run it as a service to working­ class women so that they would be liberated from housework’.At the same time in Porto in the north, women who were once maids  From ‘Portugal: A Blaze of Freedom’, SR.40, October 1975to the rich occupied a house which they turned into a co-operative for housework, with a creche and canteen. They said: ‘We will no longer do useless work in the houses of the bourgeoisie. We want to be of service to other workers, not to parasites.’Early in 1975 the women from these two occupations started a union for all domestic workers, initially to demand a national minimum wage.They had meetings in Porto and Lisbon and within six months there were 5,000 in the union- cleaners in houses and hospitals, workers in laundries, nurseries and canteens.They started a labour exchange in opposition to exploitative employment agencies which openly encouraged prostitution.In Lisbon they opened a home for domestic workers whose employers had fled the country. Its cheap canteen is used not only for meals but for meetings and music, and it is in direct contact with agricultural co-operatives for supplies.Under fascism there had been a Catholic Service for the Protection of Servants. Sophia Ganhao said: ‘The employers took advantage of the very nature of our work by creating false tics with bribes and paternalistic attitudes. Their sole aim - to keep us apart so they could use us as slaves. The Catholic organization disguised the class conflict with moral and religious preaching. They attempted to justify the “social usefulness” of the domestic servant, and legitimize our exploitation.’Still representing the interests of the Church, the right wing and the employers, but renamed the Free Union of Domestic Servants, it is now posing as an alternative to the Domestic Workers Union. The D W U is demanding recognition as the only union for domestic workers.They are also presenting these demands to the Ministry of Labour: i)	Guaranteed national minimum wage, the same as the building, steel and ship workers have won.ii)	Paid holidays and sick leave.They have already won the right to ninety days paid maternity leave. Many unmarried mothers do domestic work as it’s the only work they can get. They are not entitled to social security, state housing or any state health benefits...SR.48, July 1976
Yorkshire FisherwomenPETER FRANKFishing is a real ‘man’s job’, and examples of women actually going to sea are rare in any culture. This may have been to protect women as child­ bearers from the dangers of the sea- it was nor because fishing was physically arduous, for women in fishing communities have traditionally done other work which was just as exhausting.Their work was essential to the family’s economy. A fishing marriage was a partnership, and many tasks besides housework were Included in the woman’s share.Peter Frank has interviewed some of the older people in Whitby and Staithes on the north Yorkshire coast who were children in the lace nineteenth and early twentieth centuries when the whole family still helped with the fishing.One of the people he spoke to, James Cole, a fisherman from Staithes who died last year aged ninety-three, could remember how, when he was ten, he and his mother carried his father’s oilskins down at two in the morning when the boar went out. At Staithes the women went to launch the cobles- fishing boats with high prows - because the water was shallow. At ebb tide especially, they had to wade a long way. Looking back on this, James Cole was grateful:’ Well, to tell you the truth, a woman in Staithes did more work than a man that went off.’In Whitby the water was deeper so rim was not necessary. But it was still a long day.Maud Hind was born into a Whitby fishing family. Her mother, Jane Harland, died when Maud was twenty-one. Maud describes the rhythm of labour during the five years before she got married- to a bricklayer, nor a fisherman- and left home.‘I’ve seen my father go out (get up, you know) about two o’clock of a morning. He used to go down the pier to see the state of the sea, and then he would come back, and many a time I used to think, oh, I wish t’cobles wouldn’t get off today... And he used to shout upstairs: “Come on! Come on down, t’tea’s ready, we’re going off.” We had to come down. Get tea, and then, as soon as they went off, we used to bring the mussels in and start - my auntie used to help me a lot - and sometimes they were all froze, you know, you got bad fingers with them.’The key to comprehending the full extent of the wearying, unremitting repetitiveness of women’s work in the fishing community lies in the reference to mussels. They were by far the most popular and effective bait, but they became increasingly costly and difficult to obtain. So it was partly to try to cut down on overhead expenses, but also to meet real shortages of mussels, that there was a growing reliance on limpets (called in the local dialect ‘flithers’). Up to the early years of the twentieth century, and sporadically since, flither-picking was a permanent feature in the lives of fisherwomen and girls along the Yorkshire coast.Once the men had gone off, wives, sisters and daughters set out: ‘And they’ve gone on the scaurs, early morning, and maybe they haven’t had a drink or a bite,’ Maud recollects her mother telling her. Scaurs are flat, rocky outcrops stretching from the foot of the high cliffs down to, and beyond, low-water mark. The rock is blue-grey shale, slippery and fissured with water-filled gullies and pools. On the seaweed which grows on the rocks browse winkles (in the dialect called ‘cuvvins’) and limpets. Cuvvins had their importance in the fisherfolk’s domestic economy, but it was the flithers which afforded valuable bait.The women set out dressed only in their ordinary, everyday clothing. In winter the men fished with longlines, each with hundreds of hooks. A huge amount of bait had to be gathered daily; and this in the most bitter months of the year. Many a day there was an icy easterly or northerly wind blowing off the sea, but, providing the boats could get off, the bait had to be gathered. So, be it rain, hail, snow or shine, the women took their wicker baskets (called ‘swills’) and ventured on to the scaurs.A pair of men’s leather sea boots cost a guinea (a good week’s income for a fisherman at that time, and there was many a week if a gale was blowing that his income was ‘nowt’). Rubberized Wellingtons had not been invented yet, and all the women had to wear were flimsy shoes or, if they were lucky, lace-up boots or wooden-soled clogs. Ankle-length dresses over a quilted petticoat offered a little warmth and protection from the chapping wind; but when they got wet from the rain or tide, as they almost invariably did, the sodden, heavy material flapping against their legs must have caused intense discomfort. Some wore tight­ fitting outer bodices over their dresses, and an apron or pinny; while others donned cast-off men’s waistcoats for warmth. Over their heads and shoulders they wore black, woollen shawls which were crossed over their chests and the ends tied behind the back. Hand-knitted, woollen half-mittens completed their dress.To an observer on the cliffs above, the flither-pickers must have looked rather like rocks pecking in the fields. Moving over the rocks they were continually bent, seeking to spot the limpets, and, finding them, stooping or crouching to slide the blade of a knife between shell and rock. A sharp, prising action and the creature’s hold was broken and it was transferred into the swill. Only when the swills were full could the women cover over the flithers with ‘dillis’, a variety of seaweed, and set off along the scaur back home.So great was the demand for flithers at Staithes (in the 1870s of much greater importance as a fishing station than Whitby), that stocks locally became exhausted. The flithers on the scaurs at Whitby were needed by that port’s fishermen, and so it was not uncommon for Staithes women to go further on to Robin Hood’s Bay to gather bait. They would walk to Whitby and spend the night with friends in the fishing community, and early the next day walk to the bay, pick their flithers, carry them on their heads back to Whitby, put the flithers on the carrier’s cart for Staithes, and then walk home. It was a round journey of about thirty-five miles.Once the bait had been gathered and the women had returned home, the flithers or mussels had to be ‘skaned’. Skaning is the process of removing the soft part, the actual bait, from the shell. Limpets are univalves and thus the body could be removed from the shell virtually in one movement- the bait could be scooped out of the shell in much the same way as one scoops clean the cap of a boiled egg. Mussels are bivalves and skaning them requires greater speed, dexterity and considerable strength in the wrists. But it takes only a few seconds, and after practice, skaning becomes a very mechanical and repetitive activity. But a woman might have to skane several thousand mussels daily (and a few still do). Sometimes the mussels are covered with barnacles which can cut the hands. As the shells are forced open a saline liquid flows out, and this and the dirt sticking to the outer shell coarsen the skin, split fingernails, and penetrate curs or grazes. The skaned mussels were dropped into a jar, and a woman knew from experience how many jars of bait would be needed for the lines: ‘You might need three mussels for one hook, but Tees mussels were big and plump and then you only needed one.’ When a jar was full the mussels were tipped into a tin bath and cold water poured on them (‘the colder the better’) to make them swell and grow firm ready for baiting.Skaning and baiting were done in the home: houses were workplaces as well as dwellings. When the cobles returned from the fishing grounds the women went down to the harbour to meet them in, get the lines, coil them on to wicker baskets - skeps - and carry them back home on their heads to start ‘caving’ and baiting.Caving is clearing the line of old bait, seaweed and other rubbish. First the line is tipped off the skep on to the table. Then the empty skep is placed on one side and the woman begins to coil the line on to it afresh. Occasionally hooks are missing: ‘Some women could put hooks on themselves. Old Walter Corrie’s wife, she used to whip all his hooks on for him.’ The coils are arranged at one end of the skep, and as each hook is baited it is laid out neatly at the other end. There must be no carelessness: a snagged hook as the line is being shot at sea could be time-wasting and possibly dangerous.In the meantime, the men would be mooring the cobles and seeing to the selling of the catch. Then they would go home, and after something to eat, would work alongside the women at caving and baiting.By far the worst job was ‘mucking’ the lines if the boat had not been able to go off. This happened when there was a storm, and, since the mussels would not stay fresh on the lines for more than a few days after having been skaned, the women had to set to, remove the putrefying bait, and start all over again.The difficulty of keeping living rooms clean where skaning and baiting were being done can be imagined. In Maud’s household the black­ leaded fireplace and brasses were covered up on a Monday morning and not unveiled again until Saturday teatime, when all was given a polish ready for Sunday. Maud saw to it that she and the younger children had eaten before their father and two elder brothers came in from sea. After the men had had their dinners all was sided away and two tables pulled out into the middle of the room. At one table worked Maud and her father, and at the other her two brothers, all baiting the lines with the mussels she and her aunt had skaned earlier in the day. Before going to bed, everything had to be left ready for the next morning, particularly father’s clothes, sea boots and oilskins, lest the lifeboat should be called out during the night.Before the advent of the railways and technological innovations such as refrigeration, fish was preserved by salting, pickling or drying in the wind and sun. In 1808 the Revd John Graves observed that at Staithes ‘on the fishermen’s return home, the fish are cut up and salted by the women, which is not only a disagreeable but a laborious employment’. This type of work is now beyond living memory, although James Cole could still recall fish being split up and laid out on wooden racks, called ‘flakes’, to dry at Staithes: ‘They built them in t’fields, like a bit of fence, maybe two foot frae t’ground, out of sticks out of a wood and that, so that t’wind could get underneath the fish and sun on the top to dry them. Then in winter time the women hawked them all over.’At Whitby some women had stalls on the quayside from which they sold to the public, while others had regular rounds in the town. Maud Hind as a child was often sent by her grandmother to deliver fish during her dinner break from school:‘And she used to come down to our house when I was going to school... She used to say, “When you leave school, Maud, you’ve got to go for me with some fish to Smailes’s”... And I used to take that fish at dinnertime... She used to buy it on the quay, and they used to order the fish off her; and it had to be up for a certain time, ‘cos, you know, Smailes were one of those high-class families in Whitby... And many a time they’ve maybe put you an orange in your hand; and I’ve had to come back and go to school...’Some women tramped long distances with baskets of fish on their heads up Eskdale to scattered farms and villages. Staithes women went regularly into the ironstone-mining villages of Cleveland and to industrial Teesside. Thus in addition to their many other tasks, some fisherwomen performed an entrepreneurial role, something which on the whole their menfolk avoided, or were unable to do because of the demands of the actual fishing. Thus the women made an additional financial contribution to the family exchequer.The fisherwomen’s arduous lives frequently led to ill-health and premature death. For on top of the irregular hours, exposure to bitter weather, the standing, lifting and carrying of heavy burdens, there was the grind of housework and all the dangers attached to frequent pregnancies. It was a style of life, accepted sometimes consciously and by choice, but often fatalistically. The observer from outside the fishing community, as the photographer Sutcliffe noted, viewed fisherwomen’s activity more often than not only superficially: it was ‘quaint’, ‘picturesque’, a sentimentalized image with the toil only dimly recognized.This article is a shortened version of a description of women’s work in the Yorkshire inland fishing industry published in Oral History – journal of the Oral History Society – obtained from the Dept of Sociology, University of Essex. We are grateful to Oral History and to Peter Frank for permission to reprint it. SR.46, May 1976 
Sweatshop at HomeCHRIS POULTERHomeworking is about the exploitation of women as mothers tied to the home with toddlers, as daughters left to care for the aged or as immigrants whose vulnerability makes them a cheap and malleable labour force. In the beginning of November Homeworkers Action Groups from all over England met in Birmingham.There are about a quarter of a million homeworkers in Britain today. They are ‘taken on’ to assemble toys, pens and furniture; to package stamps, buttons and filters; to fold, envelope and label advertising material; to knit sweaters, to sew gloves, to tassel football scarves, the list is endless. As with most low paid women’s work it’s dull, repetitive and labour intensive.A recent Low Pay Unit survey found that 80 per cent of homeworkers interviewed were getting less than 30p an hour. From one South London firm, homeworkers get 89p for sewing 1,000 buttons on to cards which means an hourly rate of between 9 and 10p. Even experienced homeworkers who work at high speed are poorly paid. In Leeds a homeworker with two years’ experience now tassels ten scarves an hour. Each scarf is worth 4P in wages. For an eight-hour day or eighty scarves she earns £3.20.In addition employers often fail to compensate for rent of space, heating, electricity, transport and renting or buying equipment.Homeworkers have few rights under the law. They are generally considered ‘self-employed’ and so are not covered by the Employment Protection Act. This means they have no job security and get no holiday pay, sick pay, maternity leave or redundancy pay.Until the government enacts legislation which clearly recognizes the ‘employee’ status of these workers, little change is possible.Some homeworkers are covered by the provisions of the various Wage Councils established to determine wage rates in non-unionized industries. But with no homeworkers directly represented, these bodies have obtained no significant improvement on the inadequate statutory minimum piece rates. Decisions on rates are frequently made in ignorance of the work involved. So the Councils actually sanction and legitimize scandalous rates. The case of the women earning between 9 and 10p an hour sewing buttons on cards is actually covered by a Wage Council agreement!Homeworkers should also be protected by the 1961 Factories Act which requires employers to register all homeworkers with the local authority. Failure to comply can lead to a £20 fine (no less!). According to the Act, Environmental Health Inspectors are responsible for ensuring that checks are carried out on the health and safety aspects of domestic working conditions. In fact employers mostly ignore the requirement to register and cases of prosecution seem non-existent. In turn local authorities make little effort either to maintain an accurate register or to investigate working conditions.Historically, the trade union movement has opposed homeworking as a threat to the job security and working conditions of its factory­ based members. Homeworkers were seen as a dangerous source of non-unionized, cheap labour. This posture is giving way to a recognition that steps must be taken to improve the status and conditions of homeworkers. The T U C has a Working Party which will soon publish its recommendations for legislative change and trade union action, and a number of unions, particularly the General and Municipal Workers’ Union, are exploring ways of recruiting and organizing homeworkers.This is not easy. The workers themselves are afraid that changes will endanger their earnings whether by upsetting employers, alerting the taxman, or messing up their social security benefits. The work is characteristically isolated and leaves the individual at the mercy of officialdom and the employers, with no collective solidarity. In fact many workers earn too little to pay tax or jeopardize benefits - single parents, for example, can earn up to £6 a week without any reduction in benefit.In 1975 some community workers in East London started the London Homeworking Campaign to act for better pay and conditions, as well as for social provisions so that those who wish to work outside the home can do so. The organization expanded to include activists from trade unions, women’s groups, immigrant organizations, local trades councils, community agencies and law centres. At the first national conference this November we mainly shared information about homeworking activity in our areas and discussed our organizing strategies.Representatives of Long Eaton and District Trades Council described their work in the piano trade. Using a survey as the means of contact, Trades Council members brought workers together to discuss common grievances. As a result forty of the workers joined the Furniture Timber and Allied Trades Union. They now receive factory rates, the bonuses to which indoor workers are entitled and an additional 7 ½ per cent to cover overhead costs.An organizer with the Boot and Shoe Operatives’ Union talked about a successful drive for unionization in the Rossendale Valley area. The union has apparently extended its national agreement to cover piece rates for homeworkers.In Leeds, homeworkers tasseling football scarves are involved in a difficult struggle with their employer, Galaxy Sports. Though some have joined the G M W U, the lack of protective legislation has made it difficult for their union officer to fight the recent sacking of their shop steward. And the employer has exploited the remaining workers’ isolation to coerce them into signing an illegal agreement promising never to join a union.Home-based glovemakers in Torrington (Devon) encountered fewer difficulties. With the support of unionized workers inside the various firms, homeworkers joined the G M W U and have negotiated rate increases. While still not earning the piecework rates paid to indoor workers, their increases total 42 ½ per cent.These are the more dramatic achievements. Most organizing work has been much slower. Mainly the Campaign has been gathering basic information on the firms which ‘put out’ work- rates of pay, methods of distributing work and inter-company connections. At the same time homeworkers are being contacted for details of their work situation and to gauge support for various strategies for change.One possibility being explored by women’s groups in East London, Saltley (Birmingham) and Manchester is the establishment of co­operative enterprises run by homeworkers themselves. These could eliminate the profiteering of the parasitic middlemen.But the key battle remains, at least in the short term, a legislative one. Without legal protection the efforts of workers such as the Leeds football tasselers may continue to fail, leaving them demoralized. It is up to the unions and the public to pressurize for legislative reform, by exposing this hidden poverty trap.SR.66, January 1978
Waitress du JourJOYCE BETRIESI’ve been waitressing about four years. There are good things about it. At the end of the day you always have some money in your pocketbook from tips, and you keep moving (I’m a nervous person, and I like to keep moving), you can kid around and joke - I hate to be serious all the time. Besides, one or two uniforms and a couple of pairs of white shoes are a lot cheaper to buy and keep up than a whole work wardrobe that you have to keep in style. Sometimes you can really get along with the people you work with, and when that happens, it’s nice. Waitresses and cooks and busboys have to work together, and when we don’t, it’s hell.I always try to stay away from the boss as much as possible. Bosses are always threatening us, and trying to find something wrong with what we do. If we don’t have a union, the boss can do whatever he wants. Once when I was desperate for work I applied for a job in a ‘hip’ coffee-house. They told me I had to work twelve hours a day, and I wouldn’t get a salary. I would just get to keep my tips. After ten hours, I walked out. It just wasn’t worth it. I had made $5.00. In another non-union place, I was fired at four o’clock Sunday morning after working all Saturday night, because I told the boss I couldn’t come in that afternoon. There was a union poster in the subways at the time which showed a boss of seventy years ago saying, ‘If you don’t come in Sunday, don’t come in Monday ‘, and explained how a union had ended conditions like that. Well, such conditions still exist for many waitresses.Even with a union, waitresses are vulnerable. A union can get us a paid vacation, maybe a set weekly schedule, seniority rights, a pension, sick leave, and some medical benefits, and force our boss to have just cause before firing us, but he still might paw us, treat us like we’re stupid, and try to take advantage of us anyway he can, hoping we won’t know our rights and complain to the union. Unions aren’t often easy to deal with either. Almost all the union leadership is male, and how much they want to help varies from person to person. In one union shop where I worked, now and again the boss would reassign the stations, giving a new woman a station that one of us with more seniority should have had. We would phone the union and usually get results, but our representative treated us like children who had gotten hysterical over nothing, and it was degrading. Still, I’m glad we had a union. At least we had that much. I’ve helped organize for a union in a non­union shop.We make most of our salary in tips. No union I know of has seriously tried to get us a decent wage. Many people think that all waitresses make a lot of money. Well, sometimes you do find a Job where the tips are very good, but that’s rare. Usually, in these jobs, the bosses are especially obnoxious because they know you make good money, and don’t want to lose the job. Then it becomes a matter of your human dignity - if the extra money is worth the degrdation. Waitresses often make less in so-called ‘fancy’ places, where the food is expensive. In many places like this, the kitchens are so inefficiently designed that it’s impossible to give fast, efficient service, especially when there are three to five courses to serve, so the customers don’t think you deserve a tip. I have never known a boss to consult the cooks and waitresses as to how the kitchen should be arranged, although we’re the ones who obviously know best, because we work there. In restaurants where the tips are really good (where they automatically add 15 per cent service charge to the bill, for example), they generally employ waiters. Also, with the inflation, people aren’t tipping very much. With most people, when the cost of living goes up, their salary remains the same, and even then it’s hard. With us, when the cost of living rises, our salary actually goes down.Last summer I went to New York State Employment Agency for a job. They told me there were no jobs because waitressing was a luxury job, and when money got tight, it was one of the first to go. Sometimes it’s a luxury for people to eat out, but it isn’t a luxury for the waitresses!We really work for our money. We run miles every day. Many of us eventually develop varicose veins, box feet, and uneven shoulders from carrying heavy trays on one arm. I worked in Schrafft’s chain for a while. We had to carry round trays balanced on one arm, piled with food. It was just too heavy. I wore an elastic wrist support, but even that didn’t help. The worst thing was we had to hold the tray on our arm while we cleaned the table, piling it with dirty dishes. We weren’t allowed to rest the tray on the table because it ‘didn’t look nice’. Along with the dishes and silver, we had to clear off enormous water goblets that were very heavy when there was water remaining in them. Then, when the tray was piled up we had to remove the dirty tablecloth with our free hand (pick up the salt, pepper, ashtray and sugar) and often, because it was very busy, tuck the dirty cloth under our arm, and spread a clean cloth, balancing the tray all the time! Sometimes there would be people sitting at the table waiting to be served while we did this. This was a union shop. On top of that, Schrafft’s had two sections to the restaurant - a men’s lounge for businessmen, where women weren’t allowed, and a section for men and women. In the men’s lounge, the servings of ice cream and soup were larger for the same price. We were told that it was because ‘men eat more’.Often we are lucky if we get a chance to sit down and take a break, and even then nobody covers our tables for us. That means that I’m in the middle of eating dinner, and a customer sits in my station. I have to get up and wait on him. Sometimes the work is so heavy and so nerve­ racking and I’m so busy that I can’t take a break, and have to leave a sandwich near my station and take bites as I run by. The boss will push me to handle as many customers as I can- more than is humanly possible, because then he doesn’t have to hire as many women. The boss hardly pays us anything; we make most of our salary from tips. It would cost him next to nothing to have another waitress on the floor. When I work like this I go home exhausted and dream about it. The dream is a typical real busy day- we’re running out of food, and there are no plates or glasses or silver clean, and orders are packed up in the kitchen, and I ‘m running around and the customers are demanding the food, and the boss is following me, asking why people aren’t served, and the cook is screaming at me because he doesn’t have the food to fill the orders, and I have to go back, after people have been waiting a while and see if they want to order something else. I wake up feeling more tired than when I went to bed. The dream was driving me crazy, and I told it to a woman who had been waitressing most of her life. She said, ‘Oh that, everybody has that dream.’ Since then, I’ve had other women mention it to me, the waitress dream.Some kitchens are really dirty. I used to work breakfast at a coffee shop in the richest section of New York. I was there at 7 a.m. The first thing I had to do was walk in the kitchen to get the silverware, and the smell used to make me sick. The employees had to eat downstairs, where it was filthy. There was no ventilation and we had to fight the flies for our food. I worked in a bar-restaurant where they let me work in sandals. I stopped wearing them because I found out that rats lived under the counter where I picked up the food. I was afraid my toes would get bitten. These were both considered ‘high-class’ places too.Many waitresses work six days a week, and if we’re lucky enough to work only five days, we usually have to work at least one day out of the weekend, and we’re lucky if we get both our days off in a row. Most waitresses have to work holidays (Christmas, Thanksgiving, Mother’s Day) because that’s when people come out to eat. We never get a chance to spend a holiday with our own families.One thing you can’t mind too much if you’re waitressing is dirty language. Sooner or later, when it gets real busy, the cook is going to curse you out for something that isn’t your fault. I don’t like it, and often the cook and I sit around and joke about it later over a cup of coffee when the restaurant is closed and the tension is off, but the joke becomes stale fast. The cook knows I need his co-operation in order to give good service, to make tips, and almost all cooks, because they’re men, think they’re better than waitresses. When this side of them comes out, there’s just no way one woman can set them straight. Most trouble starts between people who work together when somebody thinks they’re better than somebody else.Bosses like to keep some employees thinking they’re better than others when it doesn’t affect the efficiency of their restaurant. They work hard at keeping the women employees divided, especially hostesses and waitresses. Hostesses have a nicer job than waitresses. They’re on their feet all day, but they wear street clothes and usually don’t have to do the heavy work of carrying load of food, the way we do. Sometimes bosses don’t like to be bothered directly supervising the waitresses, so they make the hostesses do it instead. In the last place I worked, we waitresses weren’t allowed to eat anything without paying for it. None of us had ever before had a job where we weren’t allowed to eat, and we knew unfair this was. The hostess had to enforce this rule, and if she caught us eating, she would yell at us, and sometimes she told the boss. If the boss caught us, not only our job, but the hostess’s job would be in danger. The hostesses were also made to enforce the boss’s rules on how clean our uniforms and shoes should be, what was the proper length for our skirts, how we should wear our hair and make-up, and how long and how often we should take breaks. Often she was made to check out the bathroom to see if we were ‘hiding’ there, smoking. Since the boss had more personal contact with the hostesses than with us, he would try to take her into his confidence complaining about the waitresses, telling the hostess how much better, and even prettier, she was than we were. There is no doubt in my mind that hostessing isn’t an easy job, but often hostesses order us around as though they were the boss, when we all know that they are being used by the boss, just as we are. They always make less money than we do, but still they forget what side they’re on.Waitresses are always called ‘girls’ no matter what our ages. Yet, in a lot of places, the bosses try to pit the older and the younger waitresses against each other. In one restaurant I worked a counter in front of a large picture window. The tips were good and the boss was nice to me. Most of the older women worked the back of the restaurant. I never bothered much about it, but after a while, some of the older waitresses started calling me ‘Miss America’. I didn’t know why. Slowly I found out, by piecing things together, and with the help of one of the cooks, that the boss had hired me specifically because I was young, so that I could work in front of the window and ‘attract customers’. My first reaction was shame, then anger. I had been used as bait for three months.Almost all customers think they’re better than we are. Some can’t remember what I look like. Others expect me to smile and ask them how they’re feeling, or they won’t tip. Some actually tell me to smile. Sometimes, when they catch me in the wrong way, I ask them, ‘Is that an order?’ But I’ve gotten into trouble with the boss for that. A lot of people think that if you’re a waitress you’re automatically stupid, and they treat us like children. I was waiting on three middle-aged men in business suits. One was wearing a button on his lapel that I hadn’t seen before and I asked him what it meant. All three of them started laughing and joking about the waitress who wanted to know what the button meant. It was as if I didn’t exist. A lot of out-of-town businessmen are like that. If I really tell them what I think of them, I’m in danger of losing my job.Most customers are completely blind to what a waitress is doing, or how busy she is. I find this especially true of people who have a lot of money. I worked a busy counter in a fancy coffee shop on Madison Avenue in New York. I was always on the run. Every day we ran out of silver in the middle of the lunch rush, and I would have to wash my own and didn’t have any time. The neighbourhood was high class and while I was doing all this and trying to wait on more people, customers would call me over and ask me for another cup of coffee, because their cup had a small crack, or a chip! They just couldn’t see me. They were completely blind to my racing back and forth right in front of them.I’ve found that of all the people who treat me decently, most are other working people. I’ve checked it out. Clerks, sales people, gas station attendants- they’re usually the people who say ‘thank you’ or have a joke, or tell me not to hurry when it’s busy. I guess they know what it’s like to work for a living and take orders. The nicest customers I had at the job were two men from the Department of Sanitation who took a break in the middle of the morning to have some pancakes. They treated me like a human being.Reprinted from Up from Under Vol. 1, No. 4, New York, USA.SR.12, June 1973
‘Brook Street Bureau Got Big By…’SALLY JONESBrook Street has built its empire upon a carefully constructed image of professional respectability. It projects itself as the most reputable and ethical of agencies, providing a high-quality service for employers. The Chairman shrugs off any criticism that their operations are unscrupulous or parasitic by deploring ‘the questionable activities of a minority of agencies’ which have ‘brought the whole industry into disrepute’. Brook Street, with its Training School for interviewers and a ‘Mind Desk’ for those suffering from mental illness, is the Marks & Spencer of the business. Its slick and effective campaign slogan- BROOK STREET BUREAU GOT BIG BY BOTHERING - persuades applicants that their interests are Brook Street’s main concern. After all, Margery Hurst was recently awarded the 0 B E for her services to charity.I worked as an interviewer for permanent staff. (Dealing with the ‘temps’ depends on how successful you are with the ‘perms’.) And I was soon to discover the reality behind their people-oriented façade. On the face of it, the work I was required to do was legitimate and valuable: to find out and assess the interests, skills and needs of the applicant, to match these with vacancies advertised by the employers and to arrange job interviews. But in fact I found myself involved in a high-powered sales operation, as manipulative as door-to-door commercial selling. The interviewer has two sales to make: she sells the job to the applicant and the applicant to the employer. The techniques for doing this are taught at the Training School where speeches are learned by heart and intensive rehearsals take place with examinations at the end of the course. The pressure was so great that four of the twelve interviewers trained with me dropped out.Let’s examine the format of a typical interview with an applicant who walks in looking for a job (Miss X). It begins predictably enough eliciting qualifications, previous job experience, marital status, home responsibilities, ability to travel. During this stage of the interview the Brook Street interviewer must elicit what’s known in the trade as Miss X’s Most Important Thing. This knowledge of what matters most to each applicant can be used as the key to selling her a vacancy.       Posy, SR.5, November 1972After these preliminaries, the hard sell begins:Interviewer (flicking through job cards on desk) ‘Of course, Miss X, good jobs are hard to come by but I’m confident we’ll find just the right one for you. (Pause to flick through some more, then pulls out one. Only one to emphasize the scarcity of openings.) Now here’s just the job for you, Miss X. How would you like a job which is only a bus ride from home pays £2,000 a year/ working for a young executive? (The selling line will be tailored to match Miss X’s Most Important Thing. Sounds great, doesn’t it (before Miss X can contradict)! I’ll call Mr Y straight away.’Interviewer makes phone call to employer and begins the second part of the sale - to convince Mr Y that Miss X is just the person he needs. To do this she plays up her strong points and minimizes weaknesses: ‘Now Mr Y, she hasn’t yet done cost analysis but we feel she’d be ideal for you. She’s very keen well groomed has six ‘O’ levels (whatever is Mr Y’s chief requirement). She would like to come straight away to see you.’This is often the stickiest point for the interviewer. She knows that immediate interviews are statistically more successful than future appointments; that given more time to think it over, both parties will probably have second thoughts. So she may use her feminine charm on Mr Y to make the immediate appointment ‘Now we don’t want her snapped up by someone else, do we?’ and she must also help Miss X to make a phone call telling her present boss she’ll be late back from lunch.Once the interview is arranged, Miss X is given advice on how best to present herself. This may include comments on her appearance, personality, posture, even the offer of acetone for chipped nails. The sales work continues after the interview when Mr Y, the employer, reports that Miss X’s speech was appalling, and she looked surly, and Miss X complains that Mr Y was an arrogant bully. The interviewer must try to smooth over these minor difficulties and clinch the deal. If she fails the whole operation begins again.The desired result is a ‘placement’ and, of course, a healthy fee for Brook Street Bureau. This sum may in fact be taken into account by the employer when he decides on the salary he will pay, and lopped off his new employee’s first year’s wages. Although it is impossible to prove this, it may well be that the use of private agencies helps keep staff wages low. The nature of temporary employment is quite different and ‘temps’ face a different problem: their wages may appear relatively high but this is no real compensation for lack of sick pay, holiday pay, job security and other so-called ‘fringe’ benefits. Using ‘temps’ may enable employers to cut down on permanent staff and prevent them creating new permanent posts.Officially, Brook Street Bureau is opposed to all discrimination on the grounds of race and sex but this is another area where, in my experience, a gap exists between the image and the reality. Certainly there are very careful to remain within the law. All staff are briefed on how to deal with employers who contravene the race and sex legislation and they sign monthly memos supporting this. Explicit racial and sexual requirements are no longer found on job cards but employers use the crudest codes to make their meaning clear. These are the kinds of stipulations I’ve seen on job cards: ‘Must have a hairy chest’. ‘Must be able to carry buckets of water up and down stairs’, this for a clerical job! ‘Size 12’. ‘Must speak the Queen’s English’ (an employer may ask to speak to the applicant on the telephone to check for any accent).In my opinion, Brook Street often reflects the sexist demands of employers. Women are discreetly advised to look attractive and well groomed. Young men with ‘A’ levels may be found vacancies in insurance and shipping, while girls with similar qualifications will be advised to return in six months with a secretarial course behind them. Women, even if they have other skills, will usually be encouraged to ‘try a little typing on our typewriter’ because even a slow speed makes her more acceptable. A man is rarely asked this. Despite the new legislation, girls and women are still channelled into supportive and low-paid jobs, and far from challenging the use of women as a cheap labour force (and a way of boosting the - male - employer’s ego), Brook Street goes out of its way to accommodate this.Racial prejudice is more blatant in some areas than others. Because good shorthand typists are still in short supply, a West Indian or Asian secretary will be less discriminated against than, say, an accounts clerk, where vacancies are highly competitive. Employers will often ask for the applicant’s place of birth and length of residence in this country before they agree to an interview. Someone may have worked for years as a clerk in Africa or India but will be refused work because he or she has ‘no work experience in this country’. This is another phrase used increasingly as an acceptable form of racism.Towards the end of my career, interviewers were invited to a Remotivating Lecture with supervisors and regional controllers. One of the procedures discussed was what they called a ‘priority situation’. It went something like this: ‘You have in reception a Mr Patel, an accounts clerk with no work experience in this country, and an attractive secretary in her lunch hour. The secretary has just walked in, the clerk has been waiting some time. How do you proceed?’ Normally interviewers take applicants in the order that they arrive but in the case of a ‘priority situation’ the regional controller explained that the secretary, the more marketable commodity, should be seen first; the interviewer must explain to Mr Patel that the young lady is in her lunch hour When I tried to raise the implications of this, they were, of course, completely denied. If, as Brook Street claim, they are the most ethical of employment agencies, I dread to think what goes on in others.It is not only the applicants who are manipulated by the company. The interviewers themselves are trapped in a hierarchy of pressure and competition, and the need to present a totally false image of dynamic optimism in an increasingly depressing job market. A scoreboard for successful ‘placements’ is prominently displayed in each branch and competition exists between individual interviewers, and between branches and regions. While there is no direct commission (this, they boast, prevents people being pushed into jobs they don’t want), the major pressure is psychological. ‘Fraternization’ among interviewers is discouraged and the area supervisor frowned on a drink after work as ‘unprofessional’. Any solidarity between workers would threaten the competitive system they depend on. There are no luncheon vouchers, no pension scheme, no sick pay for three months. When I worked there, Inner London interviewers were paid just over £1,800 p.a. for 9 a.m.-5 p.m. (6.30 p.m. on Fridays) and much unofficial and unpaid overtime. Since lunch hour was our busiest time we usually worked straight through it. An extract from my diary of that period goes like this:‘Conditions here are dreadful. Nowhere to eat, so, since eating at desks is not allowed, we stand up behind a screen to wolf down a sandwich - if there’s time. This week I survived on coffee and cigarettes. Today the regional controller came in and asked me how I was. Purely a rhetorical question since the reply must always be, “Absolutely brilliant!” One is expected to bounce around full of confidence and dynamism, we can never be quiet and act normally.’Brook Street operates with a high turnover of staff to bring in new energy, so there is no permanent core of employees to organize improvements. People either leave or are promoted to managerial level where their interests become identified with the company’s. The unions, who disapprove of employment agencies, are indifferent; it’s too difficult to organize a floating population of mainly women. And since most interviewers are ex-salesmen, bored secretaries, air hostesses, they are not among the most militant of workers.Brook Street Bureau owns seven subsidiary companies in England, one in Scotland, three in the U S A, one in Australia - which itself owns five subsidiaries, including one in Hong Kong. It’s not hard to see how it makes money. Its fees for office workers in Central London range from 8 ½ per cent to 15 per cent of the employee’s annual salary. For a secretary earning £2,500 p.a. the fee is 12 ½ per cent - about£ 312. If one interviewer makes five placements a week, the company makes around £1,500. (Temping fees work differently, and while these are a closely guarded secret, a 1975 rates card showed that Brook Street takes an average of 42 per cent of the wages paid to the employee.)In 1973, net profits, after tax, were £ 886,324 - this, according to the Chairman was ‘an exceptionally buoyant year’. 1974 showed net profits of £ 621,886. In 1975, Brook Street suffered from ‘the severity of the world-wide recession and the consequent decline in business confidence’ (Chairman’s statement), and so its net profit was a mere £ 293,081. The economics made by the company mean that the wages of interviewers stay the same bur the pressure of work increases with unemployment and more applicants chasing fewer jobs. So even in the recession, Brook Street keeps its head well above water by exploiting its own staff and people’s desperate need for work. Despite Brook Street’s clever whitewash job, the essential nature of the agency game remains unchanged. Certainly Brook Street has grown big by bothering: by bothering about profits and very little else.[‘Sally Jones’ was a pseudonym for Cheryl Hicks. Ed.]SR.54, January 1977
Are You a Typewriter?CLARE CHERRINGTONWhat is this job that’s many teenage girls’ dream? For although there are other types of secretary than the ‘personal’ - shared secretaries, pooled typist - most girls at secretarial school hope to be a private secretary, the pinnacle of most women’s rise in the office world.It’s a combination of a variety of jobs: the skilled work of shorthand, audio or copy typing, administrative routines and tasks and on-the­ spot errands for the boss. What these jobs have in common is that they are all servicing the boss. Put another way, he does all the ‘difficult ‘, ‘responsible’, interesting things like meeting people, making decisions, getting projects going or pursuing a specialist activity, like law or medicine. She does the follow-up work: typing letters, filing records, making appointments, etc. So there’s a horizontal division: he takes the top half, she the bottom. Hers is a dead-end job, characteristic of the business world where men get trained to advance in the executive or specialist level and women may get as far as the nebulous ‘personal assistant’, but rarely further. They were never meant to. This division of labour has existed since women entered the office world - barely seventy-odd years ago! Shorthand in the nineteenth century was a male concern: Dickens at eighteen, raking down parliamentary debates for the press, remarked that: he was probably the fastest shorthand writer in the world. This was before the typewriter, when clerks were less than 1 per cent of paid workers - which they were still in 1851. Discounting those relatives of the family who became clerks to learn the business the hard way, it seems likely that whether the clerks got promotion or stayed put depended on class. But with the entrance of women into the office, an absolute barrier was raised.Some of the first women in the office were ‘type-writers’- American women using the newly popular machines in the 1870s. Within a decade or so, a torrent of propaganda was sweeping Victorian England. Pamphlets such as ‘Should Young Ladies Learn Phonography?’ introduced the middle classes to the idea that shorthand might be good for their daughters. In short, there was work for them; businesses were being scientific about profit-making, growing larger and, heavens above, here was an endless supply of cheap labour to save the manager’s time and trouble. And the creation of the modern dogsbody secretary and highflying executive followed the pattern of another doer-assistant pair: the doctor nurse. It was, after all, before women had the vote.       SR 6, December 1972Yet, through the seventy-odd years of this century, the job hasn’t changed much. There has been a recent patchy increase of part-time work: for instance, between 1973 and 1974 the number of women employed part-time in public administration and defence, insurance, banking, finance and business services, went up by a third as much again as the number of women employed full-time. This is not necessarily progress: otherwise homebound women, desperate for extra cash or self-fulfilment are not in a position to question the conditions of part-time work, which offers disproportionately less security/legal protection compared with full-time work.The other change, made much of in the early seventies, namely the increase in electronic equipment, has slowed down some since women’s labour is still on the whole cheaper. But the main effect of gadgets such as memory typewriters has been to slightly increase the number of women in pools, or of shared, as opposed to one-to-one secretaries.Some people now claim secretaries aren’t necessary. Robert Townsend, the man who turned the American Avis Rent a Car business from a tiny firm into a rival of Hertz, claims in his book Up the Organisation (Michael Joseph, 1970) that secretaries should be abolished as time-wasters. Letters should be replied to mostly by hand, work delegated to lower ranking executives wherever possible, telephoning rationalized into short periods... and any needed typing and servicing of the executives done by the pool and switchboard. Apart from the worse place this particular ‘rationalization’ leaves women in, Townsend’s theories slipped up some when it came to getting the various drafts of his book typed up: a reliable authority says he had to make use of someone else’s secretary!A rival theory put out in the Harvard Business Review by Lane Tracey, claims that secretaries are what makes business work. Starting off from the ‘Peter Principle’ - widely known in management circles - which states that everyone in the business world is promoted up to the level at which they do the job badly, and stays there, he asks why business works at all?The obvious conclusion is that our organizations somehow are able to retain a cadre of competent people to whom the ‘Peter Principle’ does not apply. These people cannot be part of the organizational hierarchy, for there the ‘Peter Principle’ operates in full force. And yet, to be in a position to carry out the necessary functions of planning, directing and controlling the enterprise, such people must reside at all levels of the administrative hierarchy. What class of people fits this description? The obvious answer is secretaries. (A C and L K, 7:23)... Essential or irrevelant, secretaries are here; how do they deal with their second-class position, and what does it do to them?Running as a refrain through the comments of secretaries about their work, is that it’s a fall-back job: ‘It’s a filler, a filler that may last the rest of my life. If I didn’t look at it as a filler, I’d go crazy.’ ‘It’s not a career, it’s marking time.’ The second woman, incidentally, was the secretary to a Managing Director, with a year’s secretarial college and four and a half years’ experience behind her. A woman doing the graduation course for secretaries at the City of London Polytechnic said: ‘Everybody on the course - all graduates said the same thing. This is something to fall back on; I can always temp... But what did they all do when they finished? They all became secretaries in a panic’ (A C and L K, 2:14).This isn’t to say the job has nothing going for it. It can be interesting and rewarding; it’s cleaner and pays better than factory or shop work; it can end at the dot of five with no responsibility; it has some perks - and it’s easy. But too often it’s unbearably boring, there’s overwork with no overtime pay, there’s responsibility for mistakes but no credit, and there are conditions and pay scales no man would accept. Yet this isn’t the point here: the terrible thing about secrctaryism is that for too many women there no alternative. This easy path which teenagers think they chose turns out to be a prison they have been prepared for from birth.Working-class girls want to get out of factory or shop work; they have no real chance of the choice however limited offered to boys. Middle-class girls fall into it more through doing what they’re told, being what they’re wanted to be. An American survey showed that girls under thirteen wanted a wide variety of careers; at adolescence suddenly conformity was more important and their ambitions became more traditional. As the time to choose approaches, the influence of parents, teachers and careers advisers increases. ‘It was the usual thing - nursing, teaching or secretarial work. My parents felt very strongly that it wasn’t worth educating a girl... “You’ll find a job, dear,” they would say, “and in three or four years you’ll nice get married”’ (A C and LK, 2: 1). The girls are brainwashed into having low expectations of themselves, and teachers are largely unhelpful, scared for the child or ignorant of wider possibilities. And a 1973 report notes that careers guidance given to Sixteen-year-old girls was ‘particularly unsuccessful’ and characterized by ‘automatically thinking in terms of clerical work or going in for apprenticeships in hairdressing’ (A C and L K, 2:5).Besides the pressure from home and school, the med1a shower glittery images about secretarial work on young girls - images the polar opposite of any real Situation the girl is likely to encounter. Magazine stones promise marriage with the boss, the colleges promise interest, the ads as always promise everything. It’s unlikely, however, that the girls believe all this; their acquiescence in the dream is maybe partly a deliberate and humorous attempt to find compensation for what they’re beginning to realize they’ll never get. And once in the job, it doesn’t take long to see you’re 10 a dead-end street; roughly four times more boys got day release than girls in 1975... just the same as in 1971. What do you do when the shutters go down?The chief personnel officer at the London H Q of a large industrial company put it precisely: ‘Let’s face it, after you’ve been a secretary for more than two years, you’re no good at being anything else. It’s a support role, and it breeds a support attitude’ (A C and L K, 3:9). How? To begin with, the work is monotonous and routine. Townsend claims that ‘Modern organizations are only getting people to use about 20 per cent -the lower fifth- of their capacities. And the painful part is that God [sic] didn’t design the human animal to function at 20 per cent. At that pace it develops enough malfunctions to cause a permanent shortage of psychoanalysis and hospital beds.’ He says that if the work isn’t above ‘the psychic subsistence level’ the workers will put all their energy into their private lives! Secretarial magazines are about leisure, not work.Most of the work is not only below the ‘psychic subsistence level’ ­ after all, most factory work is that, too - but has other destructive qualities. While the factory worker just sells her labour, the secretary sells labour plus behaviour. And there seems to be a very particular mental alienation going on too. There was an ad in the window of an office electronics suppliers which read: FROM THOUGHT (picture of man speaking into dictaphone) TOWARDS (woman typing) To ACTION (man again). The secretary can compose letters just as well as her boss; she can make many of the decisions herself, but she must repress her initiative and creative energy to serve his. Her situation is analogous to that of the slave woman who had to look after her master’s children in place of her own. Apparently one of Bernard Levin’s secretaries who typed out 200,000 words of a draft of a book of his in her spare time used suddenly to burst out, ‘I am a mole and I live in a hole.’ In this context it seems an accurate representation of her mental state; she has made her mind a reflection of his and her energy has gone underground. And so she develops a sense of worthlessness while her boss gets an overdeveloped ego.This development is helped by other factors. Because his random needs are more important than her work, she cannot even develop a sense of pride in her small tasks, or impose a pace or order of her own on her work. She is trapped in a timeless, static world; bored, she ‘switches off’. And lastly, should she doubt her inferiority, the men are constantly around to remind her, for ‘The image that men have created for the secretary deprives her of her individuality, reduces her to a physical object, and keeps her firmly in her place’ (A C and L K, 5:14). She’s the spectator of a world she can’t enter; yet her work is precisely to construct this world.And she does it uncomplainingly, even to the extent that she acquiesces in lying for him as a matter of course. What sense of identity is a person left with at the end of this process? ‘Sometimes I sit here typing and think that’s all I’m good for’ (A C and L K, 2: 15) - this secretary’s words are like a recurrent echo to the clacking of typewriter keys. The most powerful single reason for secretaries’ inaction is that any protest, any attempt to change the pay, conditions, and promotional chances of the work, runs them the risk of getting fired by the boss they have been hired to get along with. And as clerical work is the best­ paid area of mass employment for women, who would willingly step back into the manual or service work in which so many working-class and minority women are trapped? The New Earnings Survey of 1977 shows that within the field of clerical work only supervisors get more than the average £50.9 for secretaries; clerical workers get an average of £47.6 compared to £42.5 for manual work and £36.6 for selling jobs. Without union backing against unfair dismissal and the vaguer ‘constructive dismissal’ (conditions changed so the job becomes intolerable) not much can be done.And paradoxically there is quite a bit of resistance among the secretaries themselves to the idea of unionization. As Anna Coote and Laura King put it: ‘Her job exists because he exists. Consequently she tends to identify herself with the boss and with management, rather than recognize herself as a worker whose interests may well be at odds with those of her employer’ (A C and L K, 4:17).Although unionization is evidently the basis for change, with the exception of T A S S, union policy towards secretarial and other office workers is little more than lipservice. To begin with, it is difficult because there is no specific union for secretaries and typists; scattered as low-grade parts of bigger unions, there is virtually no documentation of a workforce that numbers three quarters of a million! The Association of Professional, Executive, Clerical and Computer Staff, A P E X, comes closest to being a secretary’s union; they have no specific programme for secretaries; they have pamphlets with fine statements in the abstract, but when asked to be more specific on equal pay and equal opportunity issues, can let drop views like ‘I don’t think the problem is so great on the non-manual side anyway’ (Kathie Dickson, Research Dept). Secretaries who belong to or once joined APEX have nothing good to say about it; complained that ‘it was all talk... I wished I hadn’t joined It and I couldn’t get out.’ C P S A and A S T M S both said they had almost no secretaries in their membership and no special programme; C P S A claimed to have equal pay already, whatever that means, for secretaries. Open hostility towards temporary secretaries was exhibited by N A L G O in the early seventies’ attack on government use of employment agencies. On the whole, young women are not seen as serious workers, and there is little indication this attitude is changing.The only union to make a breakthrough into this difficult area is TASS, as part of their Rights for Women campaign. ‘We believe in positive discrimination, because unless special attention is paid to the problems of women, their position is usually ignored,’ says Women’s Organizer Judith Hunt. They begin, in their literature for women, by asking such questions as, ‘Are you satisfied with the pay structure in your company?’ and ‘What are the channels of promotion at your company?’, and ‘Do you think you are worth more money than you are getting?’ (A New Deal For Office Staff).After creating an awareness that all may not be well, and union membership is essential for change, there comes the difficult problem of how to achieve equal pay in jobs where there is no comparable man’s work. T A S S have done this by setting up target figures of what they would expect a man doing the same work to get paid; at present this stands at £69 for a secretary, £64 for a shorthand typist, and £6o for a copy typist. There’s naturally a gap between ideals and achievements, but some results, like doubling the office staff wages in a Dumbarton office since the women joined in 1974, are quite spectacular.They are also fighting for the recognition of the skills of the secretary, and for better conditions on the job. But besides this, they are trying to make equal opportunity a reality. As we have seen, the cards are stacked against girl school leavers. T A S S is campaigning for the availability of day release and other training schemes for women to learn the skills needed for promotion. They’re also trying to get eighteen months’ paid maternity leave accepted as basic, and there is talk, but as yet no action, on trying for creches.While T A S S’s campaign marks the beginning of women’s struggle in the office, its main drawback is that few women can join T A S S as it is basically an engineering workers’ union. And there is a paradox in unionization of women office workers in that their status and area of work is thereby regularized. This is why TASS feel that it is essential to fight for promotional opportunities and training- but little energy goes into that as yet. And unionization into less aware unions could well be a double-edged weapon that will only keep the secretary more firmly in her place. But it is essential, because without it women have no power.A sketch of what offices might be was made by Anna Coote and Laura King, who pictured the future office as a place where people were ‘self-servicing’. Everyone would type, for example, and everyone be taken into the firm as an apprentice to be trained for the firm’s business. In the rare case of a genius needing an assistant to function, the assistant would be rewarded as being as necessary as the genius... and if there were typing specialists, they would be treated as specialists. This utopian picture largely cuts out the servicing side of the picture which, as long as it continues, will probably be done by women.There was, in 1976, in New York, an organization called Women Office Workers (W O W). Numbering 300 members, they agitated against boredom, low wages, age discrimination, lack of overtime pay, and non-person status. They helped various women in individual struggles, took five age-discrimination cases to the NY Human Rights Court, did some research into office worker unemployment and began to open a Pandora’s box of problems at a ‘speakout’ where half the women’s speeches were anonymous... for the one thing that emerged repeatedly was that any protest ended in firing.W O W may have folded; a group of women office workers in Boston recently got a new organization off the ground, the Alliance Against Sexual Coercion. They deal in appropriate fashion with anything from verbal harassment to rape on the job, With a crisis centre, job listings, help with unemployment pay and legal cases. One woman has won 16,000 dollars in back pay because she was fired for refusing her boss’s sexual advances! Sounds all right!In this country, a small group could do a lot, without needing to jeopardize jobs: try to fight racism, research into the area, re-educate teachers and careers advisers, inquire what goes on in secretarial colleges, try to change the media image of women in the office, pressurize the Equal Opportunities Commission to get off its arse, and so on. It would evidently also make a terrific difference if secretaries could begin to meet together to discuss how to deal with the most outrageous infestations of sexism on the job, and begin to retrieve their stolen self-confidence. But unionization is the main tool for change, and so perhaps the most urgent task facing women who want to change their role in offices would be to compel a union or variety of them to effectively serve all women office workers, or create a new one.In the labour-scarce office marker of the seventies, secretaries (and office workers) have tremendous power: It is extraordinary it has hardly been used. But perhaps it is not extraordinary, perhaps a lot of energy has gone into convincing the secretary of her powerlessness; perhaps her power has been made invisible. Whatever the case, the consequences of women office workers beginning to demand their rights will be momentous. Is it possible that the sexist structure of the business world, so far virtually untouched by the women’s movement, is less impregnable than it seems?Essential in the writing of this article, although not answerable for any errors and not necessarily similar in views, was a long unpublished paper by Anna Coote and Laura King. Thank you both very much for allowing me such free use of your work.SR.69, April 1978       Poster from the See Red Collective, SR.50, September 1976
I am Your Automatic WorkerJANE BARKERCurrent developments in microelectronics have major implications for the future employment of women - in terms of the number of jobs likely to be available, the level of skill required, the amount of control over the job and new health hazards such as severe eyestrain.The development of the ‘silicon chip’ (this is the size of a thumbnail and has thousands of electronic circuits etched on, which saves wiring up thousands of individual transistors to make a computer circuit) means that it is becoming more profitable for many jobs to be automated. The new word processors (like computerized typewriters) are already putting many typists out of work and bringing down the wages of others. Two areas of women’s employment likely to be affected are office work and light assembly work. A report by Simeans, a large German company, predicts that 40 per cent of present office jobs will no longer exist by 1985. A French report estimates that 30 per cent of jobs in banking and insurance will be lost in the next ten years.Many women are employed in light assembly of goods with electric and electronic components- these are now being replaced by a smaller number of components, ‘silicon chips’. Women have already been laid off in this sector, notably in telephone equipment and TV manufacture.At a conference organized by T A S S, the technical section of the engineering union, on 16 September to discuss ‘Computer Technology and Employment’, Carmen Wootten from the National Women’s Committee said that lack of social facilities such as nurseries would mean that employers would try to discriminate against women in selection for retraining, and that women, especially part-timers, would be the first to be made redundant. The only defence, she said, is for women to be in strong trade unions and play a major role in them.This whole issue needs to be widely discussed and action taken to ensure that the likely change in employment patterns is to our benefit.Newshort, SR.76, November 1978
Danger: Women’s WorkWOMEN AND WORK HAZARDS GROUPWomen in factories, offices and shops everywhere risk disease and injury to their health from exposure to noise, dust, fumes, heat, stress, vibration, radiation and poisonous chemicals.The Women and Work Hazards Group was set up to give working women information on health hazards and to support them in challenging management on technical issues. Here they give and outline of the risks women run.…If we could get complete current statistics they would paint a picture of disease and chronic illness as horrifying as conditions in the sweatshops of the nineteenth century. Workers are still exposed to man of the same old hazards like asbestos and lead. But even more worrying is the fact that 19,000 chemicals are now in common industrial use, with thousands of new ones introduced into the workplace every year- and the health risks of all of them are virtually unknown. Legal limits or standards have been set for only 500 of these toxic substances and for only sixteen of the 2,400 chemicals suspected of causing cancer. The standards which have been set are based on tests geared to the young, fit, male worker- usually US Marine ‘volunteers’. Hazards to fertility or risks of female cancers (breast, uterus) are not criteria that scientists or the government have considered when setting limits of exposure to chemicals at work.The women’s liberation movement has always made health a priority issue. Many of us have through self-examination and self-help learnt not only to understand our menstrual cycle, but also how to identify ‘women’s complaints’, and sometimes cure them with natural remedies. But we’ve made little of the necessary link between women’s health and work. Stress, for example, which may cause tension, digestive disorders, depression and heart disease, occurs at high rates in women who are under pressure from two jobs: one paid and one unpaid. Or take menstrual upsets: some Eastern European studies have revealed that disturbances in the monthly cycle were very common in women whose jobs had a rhythm set by machines, like for example assembly-line work in electronics factories. Our environment as well as our biology affects our health. Where we can show that sickness is related to work, we can demonstrate that as such it is preventable. As feminists we are struggling for the right to information over our health, and rights over our own fertility, but we must include control over our own body in the workplace.Women are now 40 per cent of the paid workforce and concentrated by and large in low-paid, dead-end jobs, doing boring, repetitive tasks - increasingly on a part-time basis, with little security. Many of these low-paid workers are immigrants who don’t speak English well. Often they run more risk of damaging their health at work because management makes no attempt to help them either with language classes or with interpreters.The more obvious occupational hazards like dusts, which harm the lungs, and noise, affect both male and female workers, and men traditionally have had some of the most dangerous jobs like mining and construction.But women work in their millions in certain unhealthy occupations and it’s these which need a closer look here. In light engineering, such as the manufacture of electrical components, women are mainly employed to do fast repetitive tasks which cause inflammation of tendons in the hands and forearms. Women packing and processing drugs are at risk from many chemicals ranging from hormones to vaccines. Hairdressers can damage their lungs and skin using toxic sprays and dyes, and harmful detergents. Office workers, too, are exposed to many untested chemicals in photocopiers and stencil fluids. The very nasty trichloroethylene (trike) is used as a base for solvents in correcting fluids, inks, adhesives and dry-cleaning agents. It causes headaches, fatigue, dermatitis, and at high levels, nausea, vomiting and confusion. Several bottles of correcting fluid open at the same time in a typing pool could result in an unsafe level of trike in the air. It can also be addictive. Office workers also suffer the hazards of noise, dermatitis, bad lighting and seating.Many women are hospital workers. They risk infections, radiation, exposure to dangerous chemicals like formaldehyde, and they often suffer from varicose veins and backache from being on their feet for long periods. Catering workers share many of these problems. Stress from the irregular hours of shift work is also common.Women working in the home have traditionally suffered from ‘house­maid’s knee’ and ‘washerwoman’s elbow’. Nowadays, in addition to severe levels of stress from doing housework and looking after children, women working at home may be at risk from unsafe wiring or dangerous chemical sprays (aerosols) such as pesticides and polishes. In many cases it is the same sort of chemical that women are exposed to at home as out at work. For example 62 per cent of workers in the cosmetic industry are female. The harmful effects of various combinations of chemicals inhaled or applied to the body are virtually unknown (note that some commercial talcum powders contain asbestos).Women with a double workload are doubly at risk. Some have got severe dermatitis by handling substances when at work, and then detergents at home. Women washing men’s contaminated overalls at home have contracted asbestosis and beryllium poisoning. Two job mean an early shift and a late one. It means working a far longer week than most men. It means stress and exhaustion. Of the 20 million prescriptions dispensed for tranquillizers in 1974, three quarters were for women.It’s a woman’s right to choose whether or not to have a child and when. Yet great numbers of women abort, produce abnormal children or are made sterile every year due to exposure to anaesthetics, radiation and a host of chemicals. We must understand reproduction in a wider context than at present, and fight for our rights as women to retain our fertility if we choose.. . . In Britain, because of known dangers to the foetus, special protective regulations prohibit employment of women in the manufacture of some lead and radiation processes. However the vast majority of chemicals are used by employers with no thought to the health risks to foetuses, pregnant women or anyone else.The response of some North American companies to this problem (Dow Chemicals, Esso, Dupont) has been simply to refuse employment to all fertile women. Norma Smith kept her job at a Canadian General Motors lead-battery plant by getting herself sterilized. She was forced to do this after the company decided only sterilized or non-fertile women could work in the plant. This attitude threatens all women’s jobs.The British government too is currently recommending a new standard for exposure to lead and recommends that pregnant and all fertile women be banned from working with it....Making pregnant or fertile women a special category of ‘worker at risk’ is not the answer to the use of dangerous substances and practices. The only solution is to clean up the workplace so that it’s safe for allThe Health and safety at Work Act 1974 provides for every unionized workplace to have a trade union safety representative. She’s like a workers’ inspector, having the right to inspect, investigate hazards and complaints and attend health safety courses. She can also carry out health surveys – asking fellow workers about their symptoms, thus uncovering shared health problems. More women need to become safety reps if women’s health needs at work are to be improved. Go on, become a safety rep!SR.78, January 1979
I’m Gonna be an Electrical EngineerMARGARET CHARMAN, SECOND-YEAR ELECTRICAL FITTER AT THE GOVERNMENT TRAINING CENTRE FOR THE PORTSMOUTH NAVAL BASE DOCKYARD, INTERVIEWED BY ANGELA PHILLIPS‘Two years ago I had one “O” level, in cookery. I hated school and just wanted to get out, but I didn’t know what to do. It was my father who suggested this apprenticeship. He and my brothers work in the Dockyard, and they saw; it advertised.’... There are a few women working in the Dockyard now, as up until two years ago one or two applied and were accepted each year. Five girls starred in Margaret’s year, and six last year. But this year, since the Sex Discrimination Act came into force, the number has leapt up to eighty-one applicants, of whom about twenty will probably get through. The overall figure for boys and girls applying this year was double the previous year, 1,050 applying for the 200 apprenticeship places, 900 actually taking the exam. A spokesman at the Dockyard job training centre attributed this increase to the dramatic growth of unemployment amongst school-leavers and the relative security of the job. The ratio of girls applying has risen startlingly last year one out of sixty applicants was a girl, whereas this year the figure is one in eleven.‘... When we started the boys were always waiting for us to make mistakes. They thought we should be at home helping mum. The majority have changed now. As long as we do our fair share it’s O K. One problem was the way the instructors treated us. They couldn’t do enough to help. They helped us more than they helped the boys, pointing out our mistakes more clearly. We don’t really need the extra help. They even tried to make the boys be polite to us, stop swearing and things. It made them resent us. Really, It hasn’t helped us get on good terms with the boys. There are always some boys who are quick to find out our bad points. They think their male ego is suffering because a girl is doing the same job as them.‘I came second in the Apprentice of the Year Awards [in the Portsmouth Dockyard] last year. Some boys thought it was favouritism. I got pretty upset when they said “One of you girls had to get it.” I wouldn’t like to think that I’m only getting anywhere because I am a girl.‘At first it was easier making friends with the boys than with the girls. I suppose we were competing for the boys’ attention. They are fun to work with but you can’t have a serious conversation with them. At dinnertime the girls get together and talk I’d like to see more girls here.’What about the work itself? ‘In the first year we had a three-month probationary period learning to use hand tools, mostly filing metals. Then we had a six-week basic fitting course, learning to construct and read diagrams from a small bell circuit, and a light circuit in series. In the last part of the year we learned to draw, strip down and build up straters, motors and armature [the mechanism that drives motors].‘In the second year we have been divided into groups of twenty-five and spend two months in five different shops. There is the machine shop, where you practise simple cutting jobs with different metals. Then shore insulation; bending and handling the conduits, the casing for electrical cables. Then electronics, where you make a radio and a speaker. Then car electronics, where you strip the electrical system of a car and rewire it. Lastly, “pre-afloat” where you work on a model of a ship needing to be fitted, and do all the jobs which go into that. I’m working on car electronics at the moment. After this year I will be a mate to an electrical fitter in the Dockyard.’...SR 48, July 1976
‘So Long as It’s Red and Going Where They’re Going They’ll Get on’DORIS PITTS, BUSDRIVER, INTERVIEWED BY JILL NICHOLLSAfter one job in a biscuit factory and another in the army, a short stint as a conductress and a whole string of driving jobs, Doris Pitts, a thirty-two-year-old Scots Jamaican, applied to be a busdriver last November. London Transport’s original plan was for women to drive only when there was no work for them as conductresses. Then in 1973, after five years of negotiation between London Transport and the Transport and General Workers’ Union, women were given the same opportunity to drive as men. But London Transport recruits men from outside while women have to train as conductresses first. The union says this is to give women who are already conducting the first chance to apply and train. But there is no date set for an end to this protective period, which obviously stops most women from applying.So Doris had to do nine months as a conductress first, then reapplied and was accepted. She’s been driving for two months now – one of fifteen women drivers in London, the only one at her garage in Putney.What do you think of the recruiting policy?My idea is that men should go conducting first too, because then they’d have an insight into the job. I’m driving now and to me it’s easy. I know where the bus stops are, where the routes go- you can imagine how difficult it must be for someone who’s never been on the buses before. For instance, I always stop short of a stop so a conductress has got time to see how many’s there and then bring on as many as she wants. If we stop right at the stop everyone’s just going to dive on. You get to know the routes and believe it or not you know how many’s going to get off and on. So if you’re busy and you think only a few’s going to get on here then you run past the bus stop. You can work these things out if you’ve been conducting. I mean it is a team isn’t it, you’ve got to help each other. So I think it would be a good idea for men to conduct first too.Is that likely to happen?(Laughing) No.Why did you want to go on the buses?Well, money. There’s equal pay so you get a reasonable amount. It’s at least a five-day week and I ‘m not making a fortune, but I’m making a lot more than I did on any other job. There’s always been equal pay on the buses, but when women had no chance of becoming drivers they were stuck at less. Drivers get £50-55 a week on average. It’s different every week according to what shifts you do - sometimes it’s more but I wouldn’t say it’ ever less. For late shift you get extra because they’re called unsociable hours. They don’t call early shift unsociable, though I do - I hate getting up early. If you work weekends you get more again, time and a half. And they’ve introduced this new bonus too- you get about 2p in the pound from the fares you collect ­ that’s the driver as well as the conductor. You get more on omos - that’s one man buses - but only if you’re working as a driver-operator, and they mostly have crews on them now because they’re not efficient as one­ manners, and the police don’t like them. There’s no women driving them because it goes by seniority, and we haven’t been driving long enough yet.Do you think it’s enough money for the work you do?I know it’s going back to women and men again, but there’s not many women can earn the type of money we can. It’s not that you have to have any qualifications either, not as a conductress anyway - just a wee test. As a driver you have to be able to drive, obviously. I learned a hell of a lot in the three weeks’ training.Do people ever say the work’s too heavy for women?No, I’m a big lassie anyway but it’s nothing to do with strength. We’re all driving the same buses and if they were too heavy for women they’d be too heavy for men too- it’s a difficult enough job with the responsibility and the traffic without it being heavy physically too. In fact I sometimes think it’s easier driving a bus than a car because you’re high up and can see a situation well ahead of you and the steering is power-assisted - that’s if you get a decent one, they’re getting a bit shoddy at the moment with the shortage of spares. But if you do get a good bus and a good conductor it’s a real treat.I’ve been driving a long time, I like to drive and I wouldn’t say I was worse than any of the men - in fact I think sometimes better. And they’re not going to take just anyone are they. When I say anyone I mean I’ve seen men with heavy goods licences fail the test, and they’ve been driving for years and years. London Transport’s got a strict standard and if you don’t come up to it they don’t pass you, no matter how many licences you’ve got. So you’ve got to feel proud if you do get through.Obviously as time goes on you learn to handle the bus better. The first day I went out the sweat was pouring off me, and my nerves! I don’t mean they went to such an extent that I couldn’t drive, but I felt as though everyone was looking at me. Of course no one even bothers who’s up front. So long as it’s red and going where they’re going they’ll get on. When I first went out there was a woman conducting and she was telling everyone about me because she was ever so pleased. In the mirror I could see them all running up to look - the men even, but especially the women, old girls running up and waving to you and saying good for you. But otherwise I don’t suppose they’d even have known that I was a woman up there driving. And the women drivers are so spread out that people say to me they’ve never seen any.Do you have the same promotion prospects?We have now. At one time there were no women inspectors but now women can go through the grade just as men can. They’re saying to me, ‘Now you’re driving why not go and inspect’, but it’s not my scene at all, I’d hate it, though you get more money.Can women do all the same overtime as men?Yes, it’s all the same, it’s got to be. If you think you’re getting the least bit what’s the word - discriminated, all you’ve got to do is go to the union.How much overtime do you do on average?A restday a week, which makes it a six-day week, and two other chunks. That’s all you’re allowed by law.It’s a lot of work - are you expected to do that much?With the staff shortage I suppose they’d like you to, but they can’t force you. It’s a question of come and go- if you ever want a favour it does help if you’re up with them. It’s the same with the shifts. There’s a fixed rota and if you want to change you have to apply well in advance - it’s a bit like the army, everything’s got to be in writing. But you can get a mutual exchange - that has to go through the office too but it’s automatically granted as long as you’ve got a replacement. I mean if you ask for an exchange and they say no, then the next time they ask you to do overtime you’ll say to hell with it won’t you?How do the shifts work?Early shift is from roughly 5.30 to 12.30, middle shift from 11.30 to 7.00, late shift from 2.30 to any time after midnight. You have to do seven hours a day, except perhaps on the early shift. I drive the 30s, 14s and 37s. Number one in the 30s is the best job in the garage: it starts at 6.30 and finishes at 10.00. It’s something everyone looks forward to because you’ve got the whole day ahead of you. The early shift on the 14s starts about 5.45 and doesn’t finish till 1.30.If you do early shift and finish say at one then after you’ve had forty minutes off you can do another couple of hours overtime. It’s no worse than doing a spreadover - that’s what we call split shift, when you work so many hours, then have a long break and do some more. Not that I do overtime straight after a full shift. Once I’ve done my day’s work that’s it.Is that because you get tired?You do get tired, especially on early shift, because you’ve just woken up and there’s the crowds - everyone going to work. With this job you don’t get the same days off at weekend as everyone else anyway. Sometimes it’s Sunday and Monday but usually it goes Sunday ­ Monday, then Tuesday -Wednesday, then Wednesday-Thursday. Other times you’ll work about ten days in one go and then have four days off. So you can’t really talk about weekends. Your friends just have to fit in with it. If they’re in straight jobs, they ring up and ask what shifts I’m on the next week, and I tell them if I can go out. We all do these shifts and we all do overtime, the conductresses as well.It must be incredibly difficult for women with children.They must be able to get round it somehow or they couldn’t be on the job. I don’t have any ties, no husband or children, so there’s no big problem for me. A lot of married couples work on the buses and between them they manage the shifts so they can see the children - though that means they hardly see each other. Let’s face it, it’s not a very human life on the buses. You get used to the shifts, but when you start it’s difficult. You’re getting your dinner when you should be eating your tea. The early shift’s bad because you do a lot of work before you have your breakfast, and you’re starving by then.Has there been any attempt to introduce childcare facilities at garages?I’ve never heard of any. People have to find their own solutions. A lot of women at my garage have been on the buses for years. They might leave for a few years if they get married and have children, then come back when the kids are school age.Do you think that one of the reasons more women don’t drive is that the shifts clash with their work at home?It can’t just be that because they have to come from the back, and conductresses do the same hours. We won’t be able to tell till they start taking women from outside and we see how many they recruit. I think it’s because it’s a big jump from driving a car- and most women don’t even drive cars.The men in charge were a bit dubious about taking women on at all. After I’d passed my test I was out route-learning and the instructor said they were worried about women because of periods and that. Most women do feel a bit that way, though I don’t myself. Then women are inclined to be a bit more temperamental than men, and they took all that into consideration.And the union men were worried that women wouldn’t be active trade unionists. Are you in the union?Oh yes, everyone’s got to be in it, the T and G W U. You can’t go against the union and I think it’s a good thing in this job.Are you involved in it at all?No, not particularly interested. They’ve got their representative, so if I had a beef about anything I’d probably go and have my say. Every Friday we have to pay our dues, 25p a week in cash. If you’ve got anything to complain about you tell the official and if he thinks it’s worth taking up he’ll say so, if not he’ll say forget it. They’re son of lawyers really. They know whether you’re going to win or lose, whether it’s worth the bother. Because it costs them money to take action - it all comes out of funds.When are the meetings?I haven’t a clue, I think they’re every week. It’s impossible to arrange them to suit all the different shifts.Did you join in the stoppage six months ago?Yes, the whole of London Transport came out in protest when a conductor got killed. That was over a fare, a dog’s fare. There’d been a lot of violence on the buses, and you can’t do anything as an individual so they thought, if everyone gets together, even if just for one day, it would be our way of saying that we wouldn’t let it happen again.Has anything ever happened to you?No, maybe I’ve been lucky. There’s often racial tension in it. London Transport’s run by coloureds really - we’ve only got a couple of coloured girls at our garage, but the men sometimes get abuse. I’m lucky there too because I’m a bit of a novelty, being coloured and a woman and being Scots. Whenever I go people are tickled pink. You do hear stories of kids goading Pakistani conductors and that- it’s not nice, but there’s not much you can do about it, except clout them round the earhole and then you’re in trouble.It’s a real strain conducting in the rush-hours. You feel sorry for people - you know they’ve been waiting and want to get home, but you can’t decide who’s jumped the queue. You get the situation where you’ve let so many on and the bus is full and someone runs along the side and jumps on. I won’t let them on. I stop the bus and say get in the queue like everyone else. Of course then they start but you’ve got to bluff it, you’re scared of course but you don’t want to start using force against them. So you just stand there and you usually find the public are for you and they start on him and he gets so embarrassed he gets off.Did you feel the public was against you last time the fares went up?Well, they moan regardless - if they’re not moaning about the busfares they’re moaning about how long they’ve waited for the bus. You just say yes and no- humour or ignore them. I understand really, It just gets a bit monotonous. You’ve got to tell someone how you feel, and who else can they speak to if not the conductor. If you run out of the garage late or there’s a couple of buses missing in front of you, you know fine there’s going to be all hell let loose. You stand there poised ready for it. I much prefer driving to conducting. I didn’t mind so much the first time because there was no chance, but once I knew I could I wanted to drive. It’s supposed to be interesting conducting because you meet people, but you meet them and all sorts- sometimes you wish you hadn’t met them. Anyway you only meet them to take their money, that’s all there is to it really.Did you get any women-driver jokes from the blokes at work when you started?No, they were fantastic, absolutely fantastic. I’m a bit quiet at work and when you first go to a garage not many people talk to you. But since I passed I’m like one of the guys. I’ve never had so many handshakes and cuddles and kisses. Everyone was so excited and pleased - l suppose it was quite an achievement - for myself and for the garage.I didn’t fight to be able to do it. I’m not one for campaigning – for making speeches - though I’ll always give my opinion if I’m asked. And I didn’t do it to compete with men. I just thought why not do a job you enjoy doing and get paid for it. I believe in all the things women are fighting for - equal opportunity and that – I just wouldn’t fight myself. I know people had to push to get women driving the buses, and I’m glad they did. I mean I’m benefiting from it aren’t I.SR.42, December 1975
Probation OfficerJEAN MCCRINDLEJean McCrindle worked as a probation officer in London in the 1960s until the shortcomings of the job forced her to give it up....I began to feel part of an authoritarian regime and also that the machine was so big, so oppressive, that anything I could do would only minimally effect change. The personal contradiction was borne on me most in my relations with my probationers. At one level I had to play the role demanded of me by my job in which I had to ask them certain questions: how was the job going, did they have money, and at another I was genuinely interested in them as human beings and trying to establish a human contact with them. Social case workers are supposed not to get emotionally involved but to play a supportive role, to ‘help them to help themselves’; at the same time the role places an obligation on you to make friends with people so that they tell you their personal problems. I never found it possible to remain emotionally uninvolved: I reacted to my probationers and they reacted to me. I couldn’t see any way round this, it seemed part of any human relationship. On the one hand I was a probation officer with the law behind me, so my probationers lied to me as they had to, and some of them used me purely as a social service. On the other, if I kept entirely within the role, I would never make the contact required. I suspect this is the experience of most probation officers, if they are honest. It is a very difficult job. If you are in any way concerned about your probationer you simply have to deny the role you are put in, for you can’t - or I couldn’t - do the job any other way, except at a purely technical level of getting them money and keeping them out of scraps with the law.This ambivalence made me feel very badly. Because anything I was told I had to write up in my reports, and I was sometimes told things on the basis of a genuine liking which, if put in the report, would tell against the woman. I had one girl with two children and a husband in prison who had maintained all along that she wasn’t living with another man. One day she came to me and said she was feeling very badly about having kept up this pretence. I really didn’t know what rod. Whether to discuss it with her, to find out whether it was a good thing for her- which I think it was - and then report it; in which case the children’s Officer would have to know because the children were still under a court order. Or simply to leave it. The paradox was that her admission came only as the result of having created a very good relationship with her, which is what you are supposed to do as a probation officer...SR.41, November 1975
‘Being a Woman Doctor’BARBARA JACOBS... I began to feel solidarity with (instead of shame and contempt for) my own sex for the first time as I saw the way nurses were treated (ordered around and condescended to) the way ward aides would melt away from the gaze of doctors as they entered the wards, the slapping of physiotherapists’ bottoms. The contradictions were reinforced by my discovery that my identification with nurses was not welcome they were suspicious of women playing at doctors, just as they felt disgust at the thought of male nurses doing work normally considered fit only for females). I saw the other women medical students take on a veneer of roughness (thus making themselves laughable! or hop desperately from bed to bed (thus exposing themselves to ridicule), or just drop out with depression. The supposedly benevolent nature of medicine was belied daily on the wards a patients were not listened to, were talked down to, made the subject of long, irrelevant discussions usually just within earshot ) and sometimes used as research material without their full understanding. Jobs such as being friendly, rescuing patients from off bed pans before the consultant arrived, or simply explaining to a patient what it was that a doctor had mumbled or failed to say at all), were left to student nurses, or a medical student, still too fresh to understand whose role was what...SR.26, August 1974
Nursing and RacismAMRIT WILSON‘It is true that nurses are bitchy about each other, that we gossip, spy on each other and carry stories to ward sisters. But it is not because we are women that we are bitchy, not because we are women that we gossip. It is because we are servants. We might like to say nursing is a profession bur most of us know that nurses, even senior nurses, are just servants as far as doctors are concerned.’Mary, who said that, works in a well-known London hospital. Like many other overseas student and pupil nurses whose experiences and opinions this article is based on she didn’t want her real name revealed - overseas nursing students can’t afford to complain or even comment about their situation.... Black nurses who had had children and had not married told me of remarks such as, ‘You should have left behind your tribal behaviour when you came to Britain.’ A nurse from Guyana who married an English doctor told me how the ward sister had taken the piece of news. ‘She looked quite disturbed; she said “Really! Don’t you think you are marrying a bit above your station, do you think you’ll be happy?” Others told of questions about the men they lived with such as, ‘Are you sure he’ll be able to support you if you get pregnant?’ A nurse from Barbados (Race Today, 1974) recalled how when, as a student she had been living in the Nurses’ Home and had worn clothes which she had brought with her from Barbados, ‘Matron said to me, “Where are you going dressed like a tart?” They used to do things like going through your clothes and then ask how you could afford certain things.’Of course these attitudes are faced by Black nurses from Britain as well as from overseas, but there is a difference: Black women settled in Britain are no longer prepared to tolerate such paternalism; for overseas student and pupil nurses there is no way out. They are not in a position to fight back. Although in some hospitals they constitute the bulk of the workforce, they have no power as workers and more than anything else they are conscious of the insecurity of their position in Britain. In the end many feel like the Nigerian student nurse who commented bitterly, ‘In our hospital you don’t notice racism. You begin to accept it because you begin to think that Black student nurses who are insulted and ill-treated are just stupid. You only notice racial prejudice when white students are there, when there is a departure from the normal. If a white student is five minutes late they don’t get told off. They call it “personality”.’ ‘Personality’ of course is very important in nursing. As a ward sister told me, ‘The sort of personality I like to see is polite, well-spoken and obedient, and girls from your part of the world so often are, dear.’ The fact is that student nurses from ‘my part of the world’ have to be, otherwise they’d lose their jobs.... The following [is one case of a Black nurse] settled in Britain who experienced the wrath of the hospital hierarchy. Many overseas nursing students in similar positions have had to leave the country.Mary, a nurse originally from Guyana: ‘I worked very very hard at X X X X hospital. One day about seven months after I had been working there, I was in charge of a postnatal ward. A patient complained that her leg was hurting. I told her that I would draw the screen and bandage up her leg. I went off to get the bandage when matron said she wanted to do the ward round with me. I told her that I was about to bandage up a patient’s leg. She opened the curtain and the patient had her right foot on the bedside table, the table she usually had her dinner on. It was nearly dinnertime. Matron just wiped the floor with me, said how incompetent I was, what a terrible nurse I was. Seven months of work just went down the drain just like that. In front of the patient she said, “Don’t you ever ask me for a reference. I shall never give you one.” Later on that day she repeated this.’ As a result, for years Mary was unable to find a job which required references. She became an agency nurse.... If an overseas student does in fact manage to get through her training without ever giving offence to anyone, she may still find herself facing deportation when she passes her exams. Under the 1971 Immigration Act no reason need be given by the Home Office; she is merely told that she has passed her exam, stopped being a student and must now leave the country, like any other university or college student. In fact they are defined as students for a specific purpose: to provide the Health Service with a large low-paid and easily exploitable work force. The total numbers of student and pupil nurses as compared to the total number of nurses show the scale of this exploitation (S R Ns 99,606, student nurses 54,670; S E Ns 52,494, pupil nurses 21,594. What it amounts to is not only a policy of oppression for these nurse as individuals but for the Third World countries they come from. In fact the plight of overseas nurses here shows clearly how Britain continues to exploit these countries by using them as a pool of cheap labour which can be drawn upon when required and got rid of when the market no longer needs it.... Back home the conditions often just do not exist for them to go on as nurses. In Guyana, for example, there are no mental hospitals; in Mauritius the hospital structure is self-sufficient, ensuring that vacancies will never be available. In various countries from which nurses are recruited (for example the Philippines and Singapore) the SEN qualification is not recognized, a fact the British authorities are well aware of. For the men and women returning w their countries after two years hard work, and to their families who were looking forward to the result of this hard work in the form of increased financial support, it is a bitter economic set-back.But the dumping is still being done rather discreetly. Often the decision as to whether overseas students should be offered jobs in the hospitals they are training in is left to the Local Area Health Authority, sometimes even to the District Management Team. But the Department of Health and Social security (D H S S) is always there to guide these decisions with its directives. In Hounslow, according to Christine Potter, secretary of the N A L G O sub-branch: ‘In April last year the District Nursing Officer for that area wrote to the Joint Shop Stewards’ Committee saying that in the future they would register all posts with the Department of Education and Science instead of offering them to students. The Shop Stewards protested, but in many hospitals in this area it is still happening. My feeling is that it is the cuts, what they are trying to do is not fill vacancies. The District Management Team said that their action was not based on a change in policy; it was just that the D H S S had drawn it to their attention that there were now a number of unemployed nurses in the resident labour force.’Implicit in this argument is that overseas nursing students, although living and working in Britain, are not even to be considered a part of the resident labour force. Because they come from the poor countries of the world, because they are Black, when it comes to their rights they can be simply ignored. Every stage in their lives, in their histories, shows the effect on the one hand of sexual oppression and on the other of the continuing exploitation British imperialism. And yet women’s groups have so far shown little interest in their plight, something which perhaps tells us a little about the position of white feminists in Britain.SR. 70, May 1978
What Happened at HeywoodMARSHA ROWE‘When we go back we’ll find out who our friends are. We are thought very militant, me and you. We are called the ring leaders in our room.’‘This is making me militant.’‘The 400 women at Salford Electrical Instruments factory stayed out on strike for equal pay for eleven weeks, from August to October this year. The factory’s in Heywood, a 12p bus ride from Manchester, the fare being cheaper outside of peak hours.The two women quoted above are unusual in that they knew each other well before the strike.‘You go in to get your work done, but you don’t know someone down the room, until this.’‘We feel more together since the strike, don’t we.’Both women were brought up by their fathers. ‘My mother went off to London when I was twelve. It’s funny how things stick with you. I remember my dad filling the tub with water, with all the clothes in it, and a little primus underneath, and the rubbing board.’The Claimants’ Union went down to the Social Security office with nine of the women in Rochester, the next town, who were either unmarried mothers or whose husbands had left them. No one received any SS benefit whatsoever. Strike pay was £6.25. ‘My rent is £6.99.’So was the rent of another woman, whose husband was working at the same factory, S E I, ‘It’s a woman’s place, this’, employs 200 men. The men continued working during the strike. She said rather flatly how could she pay the rem if she and her husband spin up.There was a grim understanding developing about the men ‘I’ve always wanted to be on strike. I was picketing for my husband and he was off to the football. It learns you a lot of things. ‘‘In our job we use ice, and when the men came out we refused to use it, even if it came through the pickets. But the men here, you know, they are getting stuff out so they must be using it.’Some of the blokes were ironic, ‘When I came out tonight Brian sang “Onward Christian Soldiers”·, without menacing the women’ resistance. And the women were kind and sympathetic, ‘It’s hard on the husbands, they get fed up’, and not averse to knocking them back, ‘He said so you’ve done in here today, love. I said, Yeah. A quick hoover and a dust and it looks a lot different when you haven’t done it for a bit.’ Everyone laughed. There is too the grinding responsibilities of married women, the learned distrust. A woman with soft, haggard eyes couldn’t attend the rally on Saturday afternoon, 19 October, which was organized by the, Manchester Working Woman’s Charter Group to extend awareness of the strike, ‘Get my old man around the supermarket and he will be bringing home I don’t know what.’Understanding was deepening between women in the same family. After meeting a woman whose young daughter, she announced, worked in the same room at SEI as she did, I recognized them both when they sat together on a bench at the rally. ‘Although you do the same work as the women, you get less pay when you’re sixteen. It doesn’t go up till you’re eighteen.’ Her flat rate is not quite £10. Another had said, ‘My daughter’s fifteen and she wasn’t very interested in the strike. She came down to the picket line to see me. “Oh, Mum,” she said, “it’s awful you shouting at those women going in.” I talked to her about how it concerned her, her future.’Quite conscious is a blank anger towards enemies within the factory. On Saturday morning, after there’d been a few trips downstairs to the toilet, it was my turn to go there to wash the tea cups. The key wouldn’t go in. The previous day the door hadn’t shut at all. It was only that morning it kept on being closed mysteriously. ‘Big...’, as he was called, had stuffed the lock with paper. ‘Nasty.’ ‘That’s what they’re like.’In desperation that the strike could not be successful if the men did not come out, at the beginning of October the women occupied the factory, sneaking past the security guards to take over the switchboard and the reception office. ‘We put a chain and a padlock, and barbed wire, on the back gate to lock the men in,’ said Pat McMahon, who’d helped to chat up the security guards to divert their attention. ‘£3 for a padlock for half an hour,’ said Bella Fullard drily. The men cut it through at 5.20 p.m., the end of the day shift. Bella was the leader of the strike. She’s worked at S E I for twenty-four years, returning a few years after each of her three daughters was born, and she was exhausted to the point of dropping her head on to the desk and falling asleep amidst our chatter. All the women were tired.‘My nerves are gone, can’t sleep and you’re turning over and over. It’s on your mind all the time. Last week I thought I’m not going this morning and I said I wasn’t, and I cried all morning. I kept wondering who was at the picket line. Though it was hard when the others broke.’ After a strike meeting two weeks before, twenty-four women returned to work. Bored by calling out ‘scabs’ on Friday evening, when the 5.25 to 9 p.m. shift starred, the picketing women sang out, ‘Dah di dah, dah di dah’ - a Laurel and Hardy ditty - to the women who dwindled in groups down the lane into the factory, carefully keeping their faces turned away under their umbrellas.Some of those who went back were said to be new workers. Towards a couple of them there was bitterness, ‘She was a spy on the committee. We worked it out, how our plans were getting back.’ And an old recognition that any woman whose husband was connected to management was going to be loyal to him and not to the women she worked with. Jostling came up sometimes, ‘No aggro like, all in fun.’‘Nothing personal to you, but I have gone back to work.’‘Mightn’t be personal to you, but I take it bloody personal.’They enjoyed poking at the arrogance of men who escorted the scabs. ‘The Production Manager used to come out for his cigar. We used to slow clap him. Then we went right up close. He doesn’t come out any more.’Fears threatened their toughness worry about how long the striking women could keep it up, and about victimization when they returned to work. ‘I heard some of them talking outside the wages room yesterday. I think they are getting a bit tired and frightened.’ The women had to be brave to carry on - no one expected the strike to last so long....The work is graded as light engineering. There is a basic wage each week. The women’s basic is £18.25 which is lower than the men’s.‘Down the yard there’s a press shop and women working next to the men and not paid the same as the men.’‘They are taking women off some jobs and putting men on and they get more money. We don’t know how much.’‘I’ve never seen a man do my job. I don’t think men would have the patience.’Considering the way the women are paid for their work, they have to reach through skin-crawling obstacles toward each other to strike together in the first place. On top of the basic rate, there’s a bribe. The official word for it is a bonus rate. The bonus rate differs, according to sex and according to the job - it’s a jungle of private incentives. The maximum bonus for the women could not be more than 85 per cent ­ the men’s can be as much as 150 per cent.Women are timed against each other and against the clock. ‘Over us there are the supervisors- they’re out and over them are the charge hands. The charge hands aren’t out. They come round with a clock which they put in front of you. They say, “This will help you get it done faster.” You have one eye on your work and one eye on the clock. They come back and say, “Oh, six minutes, that’s good.”‘‘There is too many bosses.’‘There is always too many bosses. The “supervisor will tell me to do one thing, then the charge hand will come around and she will say the supervisor isn’t right and then the charge hand will come back and say the same thing.’‘Sometimes when you’re working you think what are you doing here.’Both men and women also receive threshold payments, the cost of living increase begun under the Tory Phase 3 legislation. Neither the men nor the women are getting anything like the £4 announced by the government in the middle of October. Before the strike the threshold payment to the women was £1.60.After the skilled men took successful action inside the factory in April/May this year, the A E U W proceeded with the women’s claims for equal pay in July. ‘We were working on go slow and the management came round and said do we want to work normal, and we said, “What do you mean?” He said, back to bonus work or we would not get paid from 8 o’clock this morning. So we walked out and then rang the union.’ Management offered to settle in October by according the women equal bonus rates with the semi-skilled men only; no increase in the basic rate; an increase of 8op in the threshold but with no further payment. The evening shift, which is all women, was to be extended from twenty hours to twenty-one hours so the workers would qualify for redundancy pay. The night shift from 9 p.m. until morning is worked by men. The factory never stops for seven days and seven nights a week....The days spent occupying the factory and the nights wrapped in blankets, have allowed for an exchange and sharing of the experience of working at S E I. While only individually experienced, the resolution of a revolt takes an uneasy, lonely path into thicker tangles:‘When I first came to S E I I was doing crystals. For six months the machine kept splashing me in the face. The foreman got a new bit put in but it didn’t get any better. They look after the men’s jobs more. The women wouldn’t say anything. They didn’t think I’d stick up for myself. He said I was only making trouble. So I went to Personnel and asked for a transfer. The foreman said, “I’ll give you a transfer, and he takes me to the other room where his mate is. They get over you and push you round. Mind you, they don’t push the men around. It’s a woman- Personnel- she’s nice. She’s not out, she’s management. So I moved upstairs. You can make a better bonus on crystals, I got up to 160. The best I ever made on soldering is 60. If you do something wrong on crystals you can get a new one- you just carry on - but on soldering you have to strip it all down and start again. I lost £5 a week through moving.’She wanted to do karate like her husband, but he reckoned she was too soft. Previously she had worked at a wallpaper factory another big employer of women round there- and stuck it out for half a day. She described women who could only see themselves from outside themselves. Because the women are constantly an object for others they define themselves by the expectations of others, they are caged by the other’s view of them:‘It was awful. You had to grab the paper out and it was burning my hands all the time. I said to one girl what are you working like this for? There’s no bonus there. She said they had to get this lot finished. She repeated it. They don’t realize that as soon as they get one lot finished, then they have another to do. The more they do the more they’ve got to do.’Women are emotionally committed to working long and hard for others. Women’s feelings towards loving and women’s feelings towards authority are connected, yet this connection is elusive because it is so deep. Its surfacing is hesitant and painful. A way of making the complicated feelings provoked less threatening is to express them as absurd. The reactions of men at home to the strike were discussed amongst the women as a joke: ‘I called him a male chauvinist pig last night while he was watching the telly. He said he didn’t want me to go to any more meetings.’ It’s complicated for, after all, ‘The men were out for nearly six weeks early this year and they lost £100 in wages.’While laughter prevents the feeling becoming overwhelming, it also delays a public understanding of the connections. The equal pay demand has torn away at the edges of women’s martyrdom at work. Their fears inside can be turned over, the anger incorporated can be directed outside. Yet the process is slow. The women at S E I have been submitting to abysmal working conditions:‘They are at you and at you to get a bit more out of you. I’ve been here for twelve years. I was working evening shifts because of the kids. Lots of women do. He [management] mythered me until I agreed to work days instead. Mythered? That means pestered. I’d said I’d work till 4 p.m. He carried on about how they needed more help until I agreed eventually to work till 5.20. I said you’d never get me here in the morning till 9 o’clock, what with getting the kids off to school, but here I am now starting at 8 a.m. like the rest.’Not only can the management wangle more hours spent at work by the women, they can retime the jobs within the factory. An improvement in the efficiency of machinery means an improvement for SEI, not for the women who work the machines.‘If there’s anything different in the job they get the rate fixer in. Last time on mounting they cut something out. They altered the jigs. The rate fixer is in A P E X. She timed this girl who was faster than the others, so now they can’t make even 85 per cent. For ordinary Timing you might be allowed 1 hour 45 minutes for 100- that’s not a bad time. You have to fill out your bonus book and your ticket once a day. Your job number and quantity is on the job ticker. They have it all weighed up. It’s all down in the office. They have a list. If your average goes up and down, if you are feeling a bit tired one day, it’s in their books.’Not content with this tortuous way of extracting fast work from the women, competence and efficiency are exploited by the management. The women’s kill backfires on themselves:‘The thing is, I get moved about because I’m good. And you forget, when you haven’t done a job for a bit, like welding, you lose your speed. The others on it all the time were making £3 bonus and I was only making 12s.’‘What sort of work? Well, in our room there are loads and loads of jobs: etching, orientation, about eight I think, and they’re all together. What’s finished gets passed on. There’s a lot of assembly. For base and cage assembly, you have to tin the wires, then cut them, thread them on the markers, weld them, trim them off, take the bases to be cleaned, then crank them on a machine, the machine bends the wires, thread them through the cage assemblies, weld them on, trim them off and then you take them down to inspection. The finest wire is 6 millimetres. If you are not careful, you bend it, then it’s no use.’‘I do coil winding - it’s for telephones - a man couldn’t do it, he would not have the patience.’‘I was burning myself soldering. I had marks right up my arm.’‘I used to work at Mutual Mills. My friend lost her thumb there last week.’‘My friend lost the top of her fingers. She’s at Middleton. She’s a dress cutter.’‘Remember little Maureen here, when the wire snapped and got her in the eye.’‘Have you seen Shoulder to Shoulder?1 It’s just finished on the telly here. Which side have you joined up with? Your women’s lib membership? I think if I lived in the time, I would have gone with SyIvia because she’s for the working women.’This article was criticized by Bella Fullard and Julie Lomax, Shop Stewards at SEI because it originally criticisms of the AEUW district officials’ negotiations for the women to work without all their demands being met. They wrote that ‘the author throughout the article trivialized the dispute, avoided any criticism of the Employer (who after all was one of the main contestants)’.These criticisms were taken up, and two subsequent articles followed. The first gave the economic context of the General Electric Company, the multinational which owns SEI: ‘GEC is the fifth largest company and the largest private employer in the UK, and the eighth largest of the world electrical corporations.’ The second article was about action taken by women workers around the country employed by GEC, and put the SEI equal-pay dispute into a winder context.       SR. 31, January 1975              
Grunwick WomenBEATRIX CAMPBELL AND VALERIE CHARLTONFor the last eight years since Jayaben Desai came with her family from East Africa to Britain she has been watching the activities of trade unions on television.‘All this time I have been watching the strikes and I realized that the workers are the people who give their blood for the management and that they should have good condition, good pay and should be well fed. The trade unions are the best thing here - they are not so powerful in other countries.‘They are a nice power and we should keep it on,’ said Ms Desai, the most vocal of the fifty or so Asian and West Indian women involved in the eleven-month Grunwick strike which has now exploded into a national cause celebre.‘We didn’t think about trade unions at Grunwick - they harass you so much there that you couldn’t have any idea about joining a union.’Before Ms Desai began working at the film processing factory three years ago there had been two attempts to organize a union. Both were smashed by the same management which is taking union leaders and government officials to the High Court to stop unionization - all in the name of freedom of the individual.After nearly a year of diligent picketing the eighty-five strikers seem to have been almost obscured by the media mob stories which have dominated the news for a month, and even by the charisma surrounding the lions of the Labour movement such as miners’ leaders Mick McGahey and Arthur Scargill, and Hugh Scanlon of the engineering union, who have joined them on their picket line.What about the women who have been supported by those men? What has it all been like for them?‘This dispute is bringing us so many good things,’ said Ms Desai. ‘Before the mass picketing began in June the issue was not so clear in our community, it was misty before. But now the Asian community sees what we are fighting for.‘And before, the trade unions in this country were feeling that our community was not interested - that was always a gap in our community. But this will bring the distance nearer. We can all see the result - people coming here from all over the country are seeing us as part of the workers now.’Being seen at all wasn’t automatic, however, for the women who make up 60 per cent of the strikers.‘In our community ladies are always obedient,’ Ms Desai explained. ‘So some had problems at the start. There was some bad feeling. But men know the women are always obedient, and in his heart a man knows he must not disturb a woman.’Ms Desai felt quite challenging toward what she experiences as glib assumptions among British women about the relationship between Asian men and women, and upholds the culture of her community, young people’s respect for their parents and their right to arrange marriages for their daughters.But what if a husband lays down the law and blocks his wife’s independent decisions, like in a Grunwick situation? The woman must make him understand, she replied. Does that mean persuading him? ‘No, not persuade. If she feels capable then she should tell him powerfully!’In the early days of the strike there was a tendency among the young men to assume a division of labour, which often took the form of a protective patronage and which effectively relegated the women, the majority, to tea-making and servicing the picketing men.Backed by Brent Trades Council, which has been deeply committed to the strike, as it was indeed to the Trico equal-pay strike, the women insisted on taking an equal part on the gates. They have stuck to this despite the ferocity of the management’s counter-attack: Ms Desai’s foot was run over by a director’s Jaguar, two young Asian women were run down at the factory gate by a scab driver, and in the forty-second week, before the mass picketing and its consequent mass arrests began, Ms Desai was arrested on the picketline.By the fifth week of the strike they came up with a radical device to confront domestic resistance from their husbands. A Sunday was set aside, the young men laid on Indian food and the strikers made their case together in the presence of about forty husbands....Furthermore, Grunwick deputations to factories, building sites and shipyards up and down the country have included two women and two men. This is adhered to not only for the experience gained by the strikers themselves, but because of its impact on white British workers. The strike committee relishes the image of Clydeside shipyard workers talking with the Grunwick women - men who have minimal political contact with women of their own community, never mmd Asian women militants from Brent.Appalling pay - £25 for 25 hours, and £28 for 40 hours - and the arbitrary imposition of overtime were the immediate grievances that sparked the dispute, which first involved four young Asians and later in the same day Ms Desai herself.As she left the factory following a row with the management, Ms Desai found them hanging around outside feeling angry and thwarted, not knowing what to do. She argued that instead of doing ‘something silly’ they should all find out about trade unions. At home that night she talked it over with her husband, also a film process worker in the cine technicians’ union A C T T, and he advised her to contact the Citizens Advice Bureau, which eventually led to joining up with APEX, a union for clerical and professional workers.One of the Asian women who pickets round at Grunwick’s Cobbold Road processing factory about ten minutes away from the Chapter Road plant which has been the main action area, explained the particular hardships faced by women:‘What I mean by slave treatment is that if a woman is pregnant, for example, she can’t get time off to go to the clinic. The management says why can’t we go on Saturdays, but the clinic is not open on that day.‘Many of our women have small children at school or in nurseries. The management tells you halfway through the day that you must work overtime that night- but this is terrible because you can’t pick up your children and you can’t contact your home.’A constant feature of life with Grunwick, then, was the nightmare of the sack or agony about your children.The combination of the Trades Council, Brent Law Centre and the strikers has been instrumental in the strike, and in strengthening pressure in A P E X, a notoriously conservative union. Possibly feeling against APEX made members of other trade unions a bit tentative about offering support. The hesitancy of the union’s general secretary Roy Grantham about the mass picketing was evident in his attempts to placate Grunwick boss George Ward, backed by the extreme right-wing National Association For Freedom. Grantham’s appeal to restrict numbers to 500 was rejected by the strike committee.Media coverage of N A F F’s intervention in Ward’s courtroom battle against APEX and the government conciliation service ACAS has subtly shifted the whole emphasis of this contest.After Ms Desai had recruited many Grunwick workers into APEX, George Ward prevented any proper ballot being organized by ACAS to test the feeling of his employees. Subsequently he sued A CAS for not doing a proper survey - precisely the thing he prevented. Ward and NAFF have turned the issue on its head. Instead of being about the right to belong to a trade union, N A F F insists that the dispute is about the freedom not to join a union. A freedom nobody at Grunwick was ever denied.But the media’s scare stories obviously got to some of the union leadership, and it was only their first-hand experience of police brutality on 1 July, the day of a crucial APEX executive meeting on the strike, that persuaded them to change their minds and support continuation of the mass picket.However, there is another important feature of APEX- 50 percent of its membership is female. Did the union make a special appeal to those members to support their Grunwick sisters, particularly given that much of the Asian women’s sense of grievance is against Ward’s treatment of them as women? ‘No, we hadn’t thought of that,’ said London APEX chairman Eddie Hayes. ‘But you’ve got a point. You have definitely got a point, maybe it could have been productive to address our women as women,’ he reflected.The women’s demands that they have equal right to picket took an ironic twist recently when they complained to their Grunwick brothers that they were spending too much time doing the talking and being ‘generals’ at the strike HQ instead of doing their turn in the picketing rota....The dramatic turn which the strike took in the last month began on 13 June, the first day of a week of action called by the strike committee. This was planned as a women’s day, following talks between the strikers and London Communist Party women, and got support from feminists within the women’s liberation movement and from the national conference of the Working Women’s Charter, who heard Ms Desai at their rally earlier this year. June 13 was the day when a massive battalion of police waded into the stunned crowd and arrested eighty-four people. After ten months of virtual silence on Grunwick, it hit the front pages of the national press.‘So after ten months we found out about the trade union movement in this country and what a power it has,’ said Ms Desai. ‘We have the police to thank for that. The police created the Post Office boycott. We had been asking for that for ten month but never got it until then.’After a week of the mass picket, it was extended in the hope of pulling in sufficient numbers to close the factory. For hundreds of trade unionists throughout Britain, Grunwick became a regular appointment. During one picketline discussion about the risk of APEX selling out, a south coast seaman insisted: ‘Grantham can’t sell out - Grunwick isn’t his property to sell out. It belongs to the whole of the movement now.’The increased picketing also began to reveal that the dimensions of solidarity were much wider than the gates of Grunwick and the daily ritual of trying to stop the bus carrying scabs inside. Picketing was being stepped up outside scores of chemists still supplying the firm, and solidarity action by trades councils and unions in other cities has stopped supplies from all but fifty out of 400 chemists.Many feminists who got up every day at 6 a.m. to travel to Grunwick experienced an edgy reserve in encounters with the scabs, for they too were mainly women. And did it work, all that shouting and fist-waving as the crowded coach carved its way through the crowd?A dozen scabs deserted the company during the first three weeks of the mass picket. One of them was twenty-one-year-old Black office worker Susan Pitts, who started working at the factory two weeks after the strike began last August. She joined the strike a couple of week ago after a programme on TV about the strike confirmed some of the reservations which had been growing in her mind.Inside the factory the strikers were abused and scorned. ‘The thing is, you don’t hear the truth inside there, it’s all verbal manipulation. They call the pickets rent-a-mob and scum. And of course when you arrive there on the bus it does seem a bit like that.’ One morning in the beginning of July is Pitts missed the scabs’ bus. ‘This feeling I had about the strike had been accumulating for months, so I decided not to go in. I phoned up to tell them and they kept saying, “Come in, come in”. But when I said I wouldn’t, they just said “You must be sick. You are sick”.’What had clinched her decision? ‘It was when I was walking through Willesden after missing the bus, and I saw some people standing outside Willesden Court. They were a couple of guys who had been going along to the picketline and I got talking to them about it. That was when I finally decided.’ The men took her along to the strike headquarters to meet the strikers. ‘I was a bit scared at first, but it turned out all right.’ Later that day she joined the picketline.The Asian women also stress that despite the aggravation at the gates, they maintain personal contact with women from their community who are scabbing. One of them was the close friend of Nirmala Patel. They worked together in Grunwick’s office. ‘It is very sad,’ said Ms Patel, who still hoped that her former workmate would join them. Scabs and strikers came together several weeks ago for a marriage in their community, and for that day tried to forget that they were on opposite sides of the gate.Sarah Greaves, a feminist who has been supporting the pickets, also said that she felt ‘really bad shouting at the scabs. It’s awful, you get no chance to talk to them. The police just don’t give you a chance, and that’s what polarizes the whole thing.’As for many other feminists, this strike is her first experience of violent confrontation and volatile industrial action. ‘I went at the end of the first week, and it was pretty hairy. I was completely taken by surprise. And I was in a state of shock about it for some time.’ Before this her contact with politics was ‘basically about dealing with personal politics, but I felt I had been bashing my head against various brick walls. I felt a lot of energy to do something more about my oppression as a women, and about the general political situation. During this I have realized that the situation was very much more serious than I had thought. You see up to then there was a real distance for me between left-wing politics and feminism. It really hit me hard to realize that this whole political thing at Grunwick comes down to a fight in the streets.’ She was wandering round to the back gate with her friends to join the picket. ‘Suddenly we were set upon by a huge flying wedge. I was in the middle of it all before I’d had time to make any decisions. I was terrified, absolutely scared stiff. I was done for assault. Couldn’t believe it... They said I kicked a policeman in the back causing him to fall to the ground.’One thing the experience has produced is ‘a really trusting circle of friends. We meet every morning to go to Grunwick, we support each other- men and women- and now we’ve built up a support group in West London. I’d felt very isolated for a long time, particularly because I’ve got a four-year-old son to bring up on my own. But now we are taking turns looking after him so that I can join the picket. It is really breaking down the barriers between what is called personal and political.’How did she feel about the trade union men? I thought they were great. Maybe if you bumped up against some miners in a pub there would be all sorts of sexist stuff. But at Grunwick you thought they had the same feelings that we did.’ Other feminists said they were struck by the sense of order and purpose introduced by trade union delegations. At a socialist feminist conference in London on 10 July, women involved in the picketing agreed to try to function as a women’s contingent, in order to be more of a presence, and to co-ordinate as a group with the strikers. Many feminists have been picketing regularly, but had not identified themselves with banners.Gail Lewis, a Black feminist who joined the picketline virtually every day with other feminists, commented that she felt impressed by the trade unionists’ ‘sense of solidarity and caring in their discipline. They were really caring, trying to see that our people didn’t get hurt.’ And Maria Duggan, another feminist who suffered a fractured leg when she was stamped on by police, said she felt ‘very solid with the support of the men, particularly the miners’.But they also confronted sexism on the picketline. ‘In one struggle with the police you would hear men testing manhood by saying things like “What sort of man are you, hitting a woman?” to the police,’ said Gail Lewis. ‘So I said “Hey what’s this, we are here as part of the struggle and if you are suggesting that women are more feeble then we’ll have that out with you here and now.” When another woman overheard male pickets complaining that “We’d have got that bus if it wasn’t for those silly women in the way”, she countered, “Wait a minute, it’s those silly girls who have been holding that gate all this time.” ‘SR.61, August 1977       __________________________________________________________________________________NEWSHORTThe Grunwick strike is now officially over, after 690 days. The government arbitration service, ACAS, finally gave up trying to get Grunwick boss George Ward to allow a ballot of all the workers about union recognition. The Cabinet put pressure on the T U C and the T U C put pressure on the strikers’ union APEX to end the strike. The massive support that came from other trade unionists, from feminists, from students, and the determination of the fifty - five remaining strikers, mainly East African Asian women, wasn’t enough to win the strike. And all feminist issues were lost in the top level manoeuvring. Jayaben Desai is now referred to as ‘legendary’ - safe, saintly and alone.       SR.74, September 1978        
Save the GreenBETHNAL GREEN HOSPITAL WORKERS INTERVIEWED BY AMANDA SEBESTYENSCOTTY works in the hospital laundry, NUPE Shop Steward MYRNA SHAW secretary of the Medical Postgraduate Department,NALGO Shop StewardMARJORIE CHESKIN Sister-in-Charge of the Nurses’ HomeEILEEN lives in the areaELIZABETH works at the London Hospital, Whitechapel, the big local teaching hospital where funds are now being concentratedLYNNE teacher, from the East London Women’s Health Group       We know that the Health Service is under attack all over the country, from our own experiences - longer queues, more medical mistakes, more harassed staff, less time in a hospital bed, more time looking after sick people at home. And East London is really in the front line. With some of the worst medical provision in England, the Area Health Authority proposes cutting a third of the area’s hospital beds. A new hospital is due for the 1980s- work hasn’t even begun on the site yet.Bethnal	Green has an extremely successful small	 hospital. Last autumn [1978] the Area Health Authority revealed their plan to close down all its general services, and convert the wards for geriatric patients. But the staff and local people had plans of their own. A campaign to Save the Green started right away, beginning with half a dozen staff and a local doctor, and growing by Christmas to a meeting of 700.People are now occupying the hospital twenty-four hours a day to stop the conversion. Unlike the planners, most campaign members come from Bethnal Green itself. The staff are not only upset about their jobs, but about the decline of a community: ‘If I had to give up work tomorrow it wouldn’t bother me. But I live in this area, I want to end my days here, and in the thirty-odd years that I’ve lived here I’ve seen chis borough go down.’ Women have been in a majority in the campaign.There was David Ennals on the television saying that the very large hospitals are a mistake, ‘the 300 -bedded hospital is the hospital of the future.’ Well, this is a 300-bedded hospital. And this is still - or was before they started running it down- a very busy little hospital. I find that the smaller a thing is, the better it runs, the far less expensive it is and a much better atmosphere there is for everyone to work in. Marjorie Cheskin.... I think the London’s a good example of how a large hospital doesn’t work. It’s too impersonal, and it’s getting larger every day. Elizabeth.... There’s a woman came up to orthopaedics here and had to be sent over to the London. She’s going to have to wait eleven months - that’s just to see a doctor, not to get an operation done. Lynne.At the moment there’s no fracture clinic locally, there hasn’t been for a long while. If you go down to Mile End they just X-ray you and refer you to the London. My daughter hurt her arm on Tuesday, she was sent to hospital Wednesday morning and told it was nothing serious, but she’d chipped a bone or fractured her shoulder. We couldn’t go up to the London hospital because it was twelve o’clock, so they strapped it up at Mile End and sent me on Thursday. Thursday they decided it didn’t really need plastering, but then again the actual fracture doctor wasn’t there, so I had to go back again on Monday. We sat there from about quarter to nine till about ten past eleven to see this doctor, and he said, ‘Oh, yes, yes. Yes, we’ll leave it wrapped up as it is and we’ll see you next week.’ Eileen.... There’s no argument for getting rid of this hospital on health grounds or anything else, it’s purely money. This is exactly what the hospital administrator said to us when he was showing contractors around a ward. Lynne.If they want to save money, how can they justify the conversion? Look at all the money they spent here recently on the operating theatre and orthopaedic. Seven or eight years ago, this hospital had everything. Elizabeth.The children’s ward went to Hackney Road, the Ear Nose and Throat went to St Leonards. They didn’t go in one big lump, they went gradual, but you were always told that something better was going to be put in their place. Marjorie Cheskin.The kitchens here were a showplace. People came from different hospitals all over England to see them, because they were a new design for the National Health Service. Elizabeth.This laundry was going to be the group laundry. We have our own water supply here, we’ve got room for expansion too. Also we’ve got much better ventilation than the London will ever have. Am I angry that the laundry’s going to be closed down? It’s not going to be closed down. Because they’ll close it down over my dead body. Scotty.... We gave the elderly the dignity of being in a general hospital, we didn’t stick them in an all-geriatric hospital without the facilities that they’ve got just as much right to as anyone else. Myrna Shaw.To come out of one ghetto into another- the Area Health Authority aren’t doing the old people a favour. Scotty.We’re going right back to the very days that this hospital was first built, as a workhouse. I find if you’ve got elderly people with young people, the young people tend to sort of take them under their wing. But when you separate old people from everyone else, then no one can see what’s going on. It just turns into a dump. Marjorie Cheskin.The plan says geriatric for four years, and then closure. So where do people go next? And nobody’s asked the old people around here if they want this all-geriatric. They don’t. They support us.... For most of the elderly people around here, this is their hospital and without it they can’t go anywhere for help. We hired a coach for a pensioners’ club to come and protest at the Area Health Authority, and they were terrific, singing and dancing and they all had banners. Someone lifted one lady up to the office windows and she was banging on them and saying, ‘Come out here, you miserable old gits.’ And when the planners’ cars drew up for the meeting, another lady was waving her stick in the air and saying, ‘If I was younger I’d give you what for!’ There were quite a few policemen up there as usual, and one of them said, ‘If you younger people were doing what these old ladies are doing, you’d be arrested.’ Eileen.Every time a ward gets emptied we padlock it up, to stop any conversions into geriatric. We’ve got 102 local GPs on our side; we have local residents picketing, and then the dustmen have been coming, and the brewers. Scotty.I think the joint shop stewards’ committee is the best thing that’s come out of this campaign. But instead of calling an all-London stewards’ conference, the leaders of our two main Health Service unions have virtually abandoned us. We think that in return for favours elsewhere they’ve agreed to keep quiet about our problems.Four of us on our shop stewards’ committee are ladies as opposed to one man. We’ve been very very active. Myrna Shaw.Eileen: The majority of the people who turn up for the rallies are women.Elizabeth: I think it’s because the men couldn’t care where they go, it’s the women that have to bring the children and things like that. One Saturday they were due to close Casualty, and we got some leaflets out very quick and went in at the pubs; ‘Oh yes, we’ll be there’- and yet hardly any of them came, the men.Eileen: It’s nothing to do with the hours, because I work during the day.Lynne: We all do. The only time it’s more usually men on the picket is when they stay overnight.Elizabeth: I think it’s because they could probably cope better if there was any violence.Lynne: I don’t feel I could cope less than a man.Eileen: I wouldn’t be prepared to stay up here on my own, I would with another girl.Eileen: We did a leaflet saying, ‘Mothers Show Your Power’, because there’s a lot of people who don’t go to work and when they get given leaflets with ‘Go to your trades union, Do this and Do that’ they feel they’re not really involved because they’re only a mother. The meeting was in a park which wasn’t very dangerous for the road, and it was a time when the children were on holiday.Lynne: A lot of women objected to it because they said they weren’t just mothers, they were workers as well and they didn’t like being defined like that.Eileen: Nothing against people working, it was just to try and get some of the mothers who didn’t go out to work to realize they could still do something.Another thing we did which I think was good, we asked five local schools if we could put out leaflets. And they all agreed, in fact they gave them out themselves.In the summer we went to David Ennals’s house, which was in a very small block of flats but it wasn’t like our flats you know, the door was shut and a porter came out. Rather select. And there was all us people shouting ‘Up the Green, Up the Green!’ and all these curtains were opening... And then we went to Downing Street which was also funny because there was a policeman with a walkie-talkie and as the fifty of us walked down towards him he started saying, ‘Help, I need reinforcements I’ve got a mob assembling!’And then on the anniversary of the National Health Service there was a protest against the cuts organized countrywide by the Fight Back organization. At nine o’clock you stood outside our own hospital and lit torches, but we turned ours into a singsong. We made our own up: ‘It’s a long way to the London!’ Eileen.Some German people came the other night, and played with their banjos outside the hospital. I was so amazed I almost burst into tears because there was hardly anyone around, and here were these people all the way from Germany come to support us. Lynne.I stood up in the Park and I said, ‘You have got to go to council meetings. You have got to be seen there.’ Because the council knew that this was happening and didn’t bother. If all these people who say they’ll help us now had come to our aid when we asked them, we could possibly have halted this from the very beginning. Marjorie Cheskin.At first we were a bit nice, like we wrote a lot of nice letters saying Please could you meet us, and Please produce this. We waited six months once for an answer from the Area Health Authority. We could have been a bit more demanding. Eileen.We should have worked more on getting the Community Health Council to support us, they only came over to our side when it was too late. They’re essential for any hospital campaign, they’ve got the power to hold up closures and get a hearing from the Health Minister. Lynne.You shouldn’t just call round the local papers, it’s the national press you’ve got to get to. Elizabeth.To my mind the campaign hasn’t involved enough of the ordinary staff in the hospital. I was talking to a Sister today, she said ‘The meetings have stopped, haven’t they?’ and I said ‘No - you should come along.’ No one had actually asked her. Lynne....I think when you form a committee, you should include someone from outside, like an ordinary housewife. I brought my mother along to the first meeting and they said, ‘You shouldn’t have. She’s not on the committee.’ At the beginning they were keeping out the local people, though the attitude’s changing. Elizabeth.While I was interviewing Eileen, Elizabeth and Lynne, one of the men on picket duty managed to come into the room four times with increasingly non-existent excuses.That’s just typical, that he couldn’t leave women alone for five minutes. He had to know what’s going on and why. Most of them are like that. Lynne.We were getting ready for a march, and somebody said, ‘What shall we do for our last banner, something that’s really eyecatching’ and immediately a man – obviously - turned round and said ‘I know, two women walk topless.’ Somebody else who was there done her nut, she said, ‘Why must it be women?’ and he said ‘Oh, well, two men walk bottomless then - it was just a joke.’ She said, ‘It isn’t a joke. We’re discussing a campaign for equal people and straight away it’s sensational if women walk topless.’ Eileen.It’s the women who are giving the lead with leafletting and practical things but in all the meetings I’ve been to they’re not listened to so much. The men have more status. Lynne.I’ve never had any time for unions. I’ve always felt they did not give you a chance to say how you feel; but now I’ve joined the Royal College of Nurses for the first time, that’s the nurses’ organization. And I’m grateful to the other unions for what they’re doing. But I’ve been a little bit dissatisfied because I thought there was far more unity than there actually is. You could make these unions work, but only if everybody was to play their part in them. Marjorie Cheskin.... I feel I’ve become more tolerant of people’s attitudes, understood that people can change and not to write them off if they seem conservative. Lynne.If it hadn’t been the Green, if it had been somewhere up north, I don’t think I’d have done anything about it. I’d have just said, ‘Terrible, the cuts.’ But because this is my local hospital, I’ve been surprised some of the things I’ve found myself doing. When we went up to Westminster, we were all militant. I would have thought, Oh David Ennals is a Minister, you can’t really go up and see him. But it’s your right to go there. Before the campaign I would never have dreamed of it. Elizabeth.Up until I got involved with this, apart from going to work, that was it. I spent all the evenings indoors. I didn’t belong to any clubs or evening classes. I come out two or three nights a week now, which I didn’t do this time last year.I think Anne, who does the newsletter with Lynne said it to me last week, that when you’ve got children you’re always somebody’s mum or you’re somebody’ wife, and when you come somewhere like this you become a person, you’re you. My husband and my children, they don’t object to me coming, but you know I couldn’t drag them up here if I tried. They just say ‘Tara, Love’. Eileen.If we win here, I’d join another local hospital campaign, Save St Nick’s. Elizabeth.I’d definitely join something else afterwards, because now I’ve done this I’d find it very hard to just go back. This has got me out of the house, meeting new people, different people. It’s been good for me, I don’t know about me being good for the hospital but it’s been very very good for me! Eileen.... It’s stalemate. We’re stopping the conversion, but now the Area Health Authority are threatening people’s jobs. But the staff are really angry because they know the conversion will lose jobs anyway. We’re in a stronger position now as ancillary workers in the London and Mile End have promised to work to rule if management moves in. And recently we blocked the main road outside the hospital for twenty minutes to show our determination. Lynne.The Area Health Authority have told us so many bloody lies they don’t know which way to turn now. Apparently the Minister has called back the papers to look them over again because he hasn’t got the truth from them. Personally myself I think it would be better if we could get an all-London stoppage over all the cuts in all the other hospitals. It’s time we all stopped fighting our own little battles and joined together and made the biggest stink that anybody’s ever heard. Scotty.SR. 77, December 1978 FEMALE FULL TIMEDOUBLE SEAMEROPERATORGRADE 3AVERAGE WEEKLYHOURS 40AVERAGE WEEKLYWAGES 25.60AGE 59MALEFULL TIMEMACHINE SETTERGRADE 5AVERAGE WEEKLYHOURS 52AVERAGE WEEKLYWAGES 41.08AGE 206:00 AM: GET UP, MAKE BREAKFAST6:45 AM: LEAVE HOME7:30 AM: START WORK, GET LINES READY8:00 AM: MACHINES START, KEEP MACHINES RUNNING12:30 PM: LUNCH, RING WIFE1:30 PM: START, INSPECTION, GENERAL SUPERVISING, LABOUR, PRODUCTION9:30 PM: FINISH WORK10:00 PM: GET HOME, LIGHT MEAL CHAT WITH WIFE12:00 PM: GO TO BEDCLIFTON McKINSON, AGE 321 SON AGE 10 4 DAUGHTERSAGES 7, 6, 4, 2SECTION FOREMAN7:00 AM: GET UP, GET FAMILY READY FOR SCHOOL & WORK9:00 AM: WASHING, CLEANING10:30 AM: GO SHOPPING11:45 AM: PREPARE MEAL12:30 PM: SERVE MEAL2:00 PM: CLEAN WINDOWS4:00 PM: PREPARE MEAL FOR EVENING4:30 PM: MAKE TEA FOR SON4:45 PM: LEAVE FOR WORK5:30 PM: START WORK9:30 PM: FINISH WORK9:45 PM: GET HOME, WASH UP HAVE TEA10:45 PM: GOT TO BEDEILEEN SZMIDT, AGE 464 SONS : DAUGHTERAGES 25, 24, 21, 19, 14DOUBLE SEAM OPERATORPART TIME                                  5:30 PM – 9:30 PMFrom ‘Women and Work: A Document on the Division of Labour in Industry’.SR.40, October 1975
‘It’s Really Stirred up the Factory’: Trico Women WinJILL NICHOLLSAfter twenty - one weeks the equal-pay strike at Trice’s is over. We stood in the rain to cheer the strikers back to	work - hundreds of women under umbrellas, jostling on the pavement of the Great West Road, Brentford, at 7.30 on Monday morning, 18 October.‘We are the champions,’ they sang. A pensioner who had picketed nearly every day started chanting:‘What have we got?Equal PayWhen have we got it?NOW’Television cameras glared in the half-light, a young Black woman hustled everyone to get into fours, Bill McLoughlin, local AEUW official, said fall in behind the strike committee - and then they marched through the gates, past the settee they’d sat on all summer, now soaking up rain like a sponge.The women laughed and waved to the crowd of supporters clustered round the gate - as we cheered and clapped I felt elated yet sad that victory had to mean return to the same old assembly lines.But so much has changed. The women have stuck together, stuck it out and won what they were fighting for the same rate as men doing the same job. By strike action they have beaten the industrial tribunal that wriggled out of their case for equal pay, and forced the American owned car component company to give in. This means a rise of £6/6.50 each, bringing them up to the same operational rate as the men (their wages vary according to speed, as they do piecework). On top of that the men and women got the 5 per cent they’re entitles to under this round of the government pay deal, and sickness benefits guaranteed.Full details of the settlement are not publicly available, but the only significant concession seems to be that the rise is not backdated to 1 January when equal pay became law. ‘That’s because it’s a negotiated settlement,’ said Sally Groves, an assembly worker at the factory. ‘We didn’t get it through the Equal Pay Act – you could say we got it despite the Equal Pay Act.’For weeks the company had used the tribunal’s ruling as an excuse, saying that as the women weren’t eligible for equal pay, it would go against the pay deal to give them a rise. But as the women and their union didn’t go to the tribunal, not trusting it to accept their claim, its decision isn’t legally binding. But it does make this a unique situation­ even without the full support of the men in their factory, the women have wrung equal pay out of an employer not legally obliged to grant it.To save face, the company isn’t saying it’s lost. The official announcement that the strike was over was ambiguously worded: ‘Both union and employer agree that the terms of the Equal Pay Act have been complied with’; the company had claimed that all along. Apparently the ambiguity was also intended to stop the Department of Employment asking awkward questions about whether this was equal pay or an excessive pay rise.The women are sure they’ve won, and want everyone to know it. And they’ve made other gains - a real community and a sense of solidarity with other workers. On Monday evenings they’ll join the picket line at Grunwick’s, and they’re giving the mainly Asian strikers there half the proceeds of the victory social, and half their first weekly levy of 10p a head; the rest will go into a fighting fund to support future strikes.And they plan regular factory meetings to support one another. ‘Everyone must come,’ said Eileen Ward at the mass meeting where the offer was accepted. ‘No one must ever stand alone again.’ They have agreed to come out in protest if there’s any victimization. ‘There’s been some aggro since we went back,’ said Sally Grove, ‘but not as much as you might expect - some of the worst left during the strike.’ ‘There’s heaps of things to sort out now,’ she added. ‘All the differentials are up the creek, and a lot of men feel hard done by. It’s really stirred up the factory.’It caused quite a stir when two days after going back one woman applied to be a forklift truck driver. Management was horrified - they’d hoped ‘women’s lib’ was left on the picket line. She got the job though, and starts training soon.The clock-office clerks scored a victory too. They were out all along in solidarity, though they weren’t affected by the claim, and as part of the settlement got an extra £1.50 a week. Come pay day, Atkins, the manager, tried to slide out of it, so they threatened to strike next morning. He paid up at once.A Suspect Statistic: the Trico tribunal is officially listed as a success ­ because the applicant won!SR.53, December 1976
Lesbians IgniteANNY BRACKXLouise Boychuk’s employers, city stockbrokers H.J. Symons Holdings, sacked her for wearing a ‘Lesbians Ignite’ badge in the office. She started proceedings against them for unfair dismissal. The industrial tribunal hearing featured a desiccated panel chairman, who fancied himself as God’s Judicial administrator; a triple-chinned stockbroker, who consulted a dictionary to find out what a lesbian is; two lawyers in honourable opposition; a roomful of lesbian supporters, badges all over; and Louise, who in vain tried to hammer through to the panel that wearing a lesbian badge was a principled stand confirming her identity.The tone was set from the beginning: ‘Might there have been young girls, aged sixteen, just out of school, working with Miss Boychuk?’ The defence avidly confirmed the chairman’s suspicions.It was easy, in this atmosphere of moral indignation, for the defence to put their case: to request Miss Boychuk to take off her badge was reasonable as she was ‘displaying a wording at our place of business which is distasteful to others and which could be injuries to our best interests if observed by our clients, whose goodwill results in the earning of large amounts of overseas currencies beneficial to our country’. (Could it be true that lesbianism is tearing down British capitalism?)Also the fleshy stockbroker didn’t want to be ‘the laughing stock of the Arab world’. Lending him a hand, in old boys’ style, the chairman added that ‘any firm is allowed to protect its reputation’.‘Miss Boychuk took no notice of the request,’ the defence continued, and kept wearing her badge, even after being warned that she risked her job. As ‘reasonable order’ had to be maintained in a firm, it was not unfair, under those circumstances, to dismiss Miss Boychuk, the lawyer claimed.Soon it transpired that Louise hardly ever saw any of the ‘overseas currencies’ carriers, that nobody in the firm had ever before taken offence at her wearing gay badges, and that there were no complaints about the quality of her work. The whole defence was built on speculation, and when questioned on this the stockbroker had to admit he had expressed ‘an opinion’.He also expressed his opinion on the subject of lesbianism; it is perverted, as confirmed by the dictionary. To leave no doubt about his own ‘normality’ he said he would not like to sit near a homosexual, while claiming in the same breath that he didn’t dismiss Louise because of his prejudice against lesbians.But prejudice is not the only reason for objecting to gayness, according to the chairman, who before had mumbled that the word ‘gay’ had been perverted. Referring to Genesis, he informed Louise that the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. Fortunately her lawyer pointed out that this went beyond the prerogative of a tribunal and that in fact lesbianism is not illegal in this country. Louise patiently carried on with her endeavours to explain that she wore gay badges as a symbol, so that people would not assume she was heterosexual and to show ‘a real person behind the fearful word lesbian’. But in no way did the chairman see a real person: ‘Aren’t you really trying to encourage people to become lesbians; bringing other women into the cult?’At this the audience gave him to understand that he should be practising in a sty, not a court.Summing up, Louise’s lawyer said that sacking somebody because she is openly a lesbian is as unfair as dismissing Jewish employees because of Arab boycotts.The panel reserved judgement to a later date.Louise Boychuk subsequently lost her case.SR. 54, January 1977
‘We’re Not Criminals’: Prostitutes OrganizeVICTORIA GREENProstitutes in Birmingham are organizing to fight for decriminalization of prostitution [1977]. A group got together eighteen months ago to work out how sympathetic probation officers could be more useful to women on the streets. The prostitutes suggested a drop-in centre for informal advice and meetings. They produced a leafier, Red Light, giving legal and medical information and the address of the drop-in centre. Last summer PROS (Programme for the Reform of Soliciting Laws) began its campaign against the prostitution laws.‘If the law was changed we could work together and be safe from attacks. Blokes think, “She’s only an old pro, I can do what I like to her.” ‘Susan was talking about the dangers of being a prostitute. She has been working with the group since it began: ‘I’ve been thinking about changing the law for years. We’re not criminals but the law is always after us. We’re picked up all the time, day after day. And now they’re thinking of putting the fines up to £100. My friends say “We’re on the streets to feed the kids; I can’t pay that, they’ll have to send me to prison.”‘Carol is in P R O S; she was sent to prison for three months last summer and her child was taken into care. Louise, who used to work for the probation service, went to see her in prison: ‘Carol’s a friend of mine and I know she’s not a criminal. It enraged me that she was in there.’Eileen used to be a probation officer, she teaches now. ‘We started off trying to see how we could be more useful to the women on the streets. Malcolm, a solicitor, Ann, and four others formed a working nucleus. Ann left the scene after she had been to jail. The drop-in centre has made a lot of difference. The girls come along and we all work out what’s to be done to change their situation.’Susan was part of the group which persuaded the Balsall Heath Association, a local residents’ organization, to let them have space to meet. ‘They were frightened we’d use it as a brothel and that there’d be knifings or brawls; it’s funny how people always think of that son of thing when they think of us. We had to keep pressing them for months but we got it. Now we go before the Committee every three months to keep the room. And it’s working, it’s central to where we work and easy to get to. I used to think seeing probation officers was like seeing the headmaster, you’d have to sit up straight and all that. Now we talk about our rights and about how to change things. We’re making a video film about our lives to try and educate probation officers and magistrates about prostitutes.’But the police know about the centre, too. In theory prostitutes are free to meet, leaflet and campaign; but because the law labels them ‘common prostitutes’, they can be picked up at any time - it’s a very unclear and oppressive situation. Susan was going to the centre one night: ‘I saw the law outside sitting in its car; their headlights were shining on the door. Another night I left with my mate at about 11:30 and they picked us up after we’d walked down the street a bit. They charged us with “loitering”, we pleaded not guilty but we lost. I never used to be charged with loitering, only with soliciting. They are there nearly every night, just driving about or sitting outside. We try to come and go in groups of four or five, but we can’t always manage it.’‘It is a problem.’ Louise is worried because ‘it might put women off coming in. The centre makes the Vice Squad’s job easier because they know they’ll find prostitutes coming out.’ And the group is always worried about losing its members; Susan is under threat of prison now. ‘They pick you up a few times, they tot up the number of charges and then you’re in court. You stand there while they say it’s the eighteenth time. It all goes on your record.’‘The mere charge means you’re a “common prostitute”, which means you have three previous offences against you.’ Elleen points out that prostitutes are the only people who have previous convictions used against them in court. (N B Men accused of rape don’t.)‘We can’t do anything right. If you walk down the road with a boyfriend he’s accused of poncing. If you walk down the road alone you’re picked up.’ Susan has a friend whose husband left her with four children; she’s been fined £35 for soliciting. ‘Sometimes,’ says Louise, ‘the law actually forces women on to the streets. That woman is on social security. She has to earn the money for the fine or go to prison.’We talked about the violence women suffer. ‘Anne was beaten up, he had her leg broken. The police did nothing.’ Louise thinks the police see violence as an occupational hazard for prostitutes. Susan has been in danger. ‘There was this knifer around; in the end he killed Yvonne Kerr, her body was found in the river. Then the law wanted our help, they wanted us to watch out for him and give them information. They left us alone when they wanted us to help them get the bloke. We were terrified and we worked together for safety. I hired a room with some friends and when the law found out they raided us and that was that.’‘We want to publicize what it’s really like for girls on the street.’ Eileen believes ‘the women themselves must do the talking or it’s no good. We all take decisions together, it took us months to hammer out our programme. It’s what the pros themselves want.’‘It’s got to come from us, we know what’s going on.’ Susan laughs at the way people think about prostitutes: ‘If you’re a pro, people think you’re somehow ill, or you don’t wash or something. Blokes ask me, “Why are you doing this?” and I ask them why they drive around Balsall Heath picking us up. ‘Carol is scathing about liberals who see her as some sort of ‘pathetic, stupid victim’. ‘I just want to hustle in peace.’PROS is opposed to any form of licensing system. ‘When we were working on our programme, all the pros were against any regulation and against licensed brothels.’ Eileen explains that ‘they want to control their own lives and work without being intimidated by anyone.’They are optimistic about the campaign. ‘There are groups forming in Sheffield, Leamington and Leicester. They will distribute the bulletin we are bringing out this month. It will be a way for prostitutes to give their own views and we are putting a coupon in for women to send back if they want to join us. The bulletin will come out once a month and carry legal advice, news and medical information.’ Eileen described the difficulties they had deciding on an address where they can be reached: ‘There will be loads of nuts ready to harass; and of course the police can move in on any place used by “common prostitutes”.’ They are all critical of feminists who haven’t taken up the issue of the prostitution laws. Eileen and Louise agreed: ‘We want women’s liberation to think about the whole thing and discuss it, but not just use it. They have used the word “prostitute” in a really nasty way – about housewives, to sum up their idea of the exploited situation of women. But we need allies to lobby and to publicize our programme. And we need practical help, centres to meet in and money to run the campaign.’SR.56, March 1977
Women Farmers in ZambiaBARBARA ROGERSAt the Chapula Irrigation Project in Zambia, the most successful farmers are women. The project’s training manager, Margaret Lubinda, is known at the Lusaka headquarters as one of their best project staffer. Increasingly, women throughout the Chapula area are asking for training in the new techniques of food production.For Zambia, as for practically all underdeveloped countries, the success or failure of these farmers will be crucial. Faced with an acute economic crisis because of falling copper prices, the Zambian government has declared agricultural self-sufficiency to be a priority in future development planning.In most of Africa, according to studies done by the UN Economic Commission for Africa, the women do the bulk of the agricultural work. Zambia is no exception, and on the Chapula project almost all of those working in the field are women, even where the primary tenant is registered as the man.It has not been easy for the women. The first to be trained in the new techniques of irrigated vegetable production was fifty-three-year­old Rachel Mutoba. She told me that she was very proud of having been the pioneer when so many other women were unwilling to try it ­ others had followed, but only a year and a half later. Even the management had said that women wouldn’t be able to do the work, but they had been forced to change their minds because she had done so well. I asked her why she had found the courage to be the first. ‘Perhaps I was directed by God,’ she answered.Another of the early participants is forty-five-year-old Alexandrina Mkandu. She was working on her handsome rows of cabbages while I talked to her. She has been on the project for some seven or eight years now, and is quite clear about her ambitions for the future. She uses some of her income from the project to send her children to school, but otherwise every penny is saved. She is planning to buy chickens for a poultry unit and to further expand her capital. Her ultimate goal is to buy an irrigation pump of her own, at which point she will leave the project and develop another plot of her own nearer home, which she will cultivate with her whole family.These women are fiercely independent: they were adamant that they controlled all the income from their plots, using it to feed, clothe and educate their children, and to send them to school. Alexandrina Mkandu had remarried while working on her plot, after the death of her first husband; her new husband had demanded that she leave the scheme and live off his earnings as a fish-trader. She told him that with eight children from her previous marriage, she simply could not afford to rely on this, and insisted on continuing.Many of the women I met, both inside and outside the project itself, had no husbands to help them in their work; they were either unmarried or had husbands working in the mining towns of the Copperbelt. These women were not merely supporting their own children, but in several cases their brothers, sisters, parents and assorted other relatives. One project member I saw at her home; Agnes Chembo was supporting about thirty people, both adults and children, while receiving help from only two of them on her vegetable plot. She also built all the houses for them- again, not unusual in the area, where the women do much of the construction and maintenance of the buildings.The women of the Chapula area are by no means limited to farming: perhaps 90 per cent of all the traders in the near-by Kalulushi market are women. Some are selling their own produce, but many of them specialize in commerce, buying foodstuffs from the Chapula project as well as individual farmers, taking the bus into town and reselling at a profit. I was introduced to two of the most successful traders. One, Lutha Mukabe, had a very impressive set of houses, granaries, chicken coops and her own van, which she drives between the farming area and the market. She supports two ‘mothers’ (an aunt would be counted as a mother) and employs three full-time workers to deal with her chickens and vegetable fields. She is clearly a successful manager, having started with a government loan for 100 chickens and, after repaying the loan, constantly reinvesting in her farming and commercial business. She had never joined the irrigation project; ‘the work is too hard,’ she said.Despite the success stories, the women of Zambia have a long way to go. Though women traditionally work on the land, training in agriculture is still seen as something for men, and women need unusual determination to break into that field instead of the ‘home economics’ for which the men - especially international development personnel - consider them most suited. Margaret Lubinda in charge of horticultural training at Chapula for people from all over Zambia, told me that when she trained a few years ago, women in the Natural Resources Development College had been expected to do nutrition, a ‘safer’ subject than agriculture; but this was changing now: ‘Women are getting more ambitious: they may be trying to challenge men.’But the situation in Zambia is somewhat better than other African countries. In several of the neighbouring countries, where the tradition of women producing most of the food is at least as strong, there are no places for them in agricultural training courses and no female agricultural advisers to work with the farmers at grass-roots level. With the flight of many men to the nearest town or, as in the case of Malawi, to the mines in South Africa- the women are left alone to support whole families. They face blatant discrimination by the policy-makers with their glib claims to know better than the women where their place is.SR.67, February 1978 
6	EDUCATIONThere can be no equality at work between men and women unless there is equality of opportunity. But our education system offers a semblance of equal opportunity rather than its reality. It disadvantages all women compared to men, and it also discriminates between women on class and race grounds. Working-class girls have never been encouraged to further their education for the sake of it. They have always received vocational education at school, which has been geared to low-paid women’s work, or to domestic work, and only a token number continue into higher education.In primary school the curriculum on paper may appear to be the same for all, but teachers’ expectations can create subtle and powerful differences. The general tendency is to expect girls to be conformist, helpful and to wipe the tables; boys are expected to be independent, adventurous and unruly. School books offer sharply contrasting adult models: women seen in a very narrow range of often home-based activities, men in a wide range of important or exciting occupations. The most severe difference comes at secondary-school level with the streaming of boys into science and technical subjects and girls into arts and domestic sciences. By the time of Advanced level exams, there are more boys studying than girls, and the boys are taking exams in more subjects.When girls leave school, the majority who go into further education learn typing and office skills. Some working-class girls who reject this and the alternatives of factory or shop work, are advised to train as nursery nurses who are lower paid, have longer hours and shorter holidays than nursery teachers. One young woman who wanted to be a social worker was told by the careers adviser at her school that she should be a nursery nurse ‘because she was working class’ (SR.75). There are less than a third of girls compared to boys on part-time day-release or sandwich courses. Of the 5 per cent of girls who obtain apprenticeships on leaving school, 80 per cent go into hairdressing where the dropout and turnover rate is high because the apprentices ‘are often treated little better than skivvies’. One young woman said in Spare Rib No. 68 that her employer seemed to think that because she was on a day-release course, his obligations were met and she received no training at work.For girls who continue into higher education and academic work, the conflicts between masculinity and femininity continue. Women can feel divided in themselves between their emotions and their intellect, between what seem like feminine feelings and masculine ambitions. They can feel worthless despite their desire to continue learning and find it hard to feel motivated. The idea that women can be assimilated into the system of university education as it was in the nineteenth century when they were at last admitted has been handed down to the present. Its inadequacy is shown by the fact that only one third of university students are women, by the difference between job opportunities open to women and men graduates, and by the crisis in consciousness felt by women students in the sixties which contributed to the beginning of the women’s liberation movement. Women have become aware of bias in the way subjects are perceived, structured and taught. Sara Maitland wrote that it was even more important for women to overturn the whole of a subject’s perspective in order to see it in relation to women than to try to insert women into the gaps where they had been left out: ‘Women’s history... is riddled with mysteries, inconsistencies and unanswered questions. Even more damning than the unanswered questions are the questions that are never even asked’ (SR. 13). Out of this questioning, women’s studies emerged, to research into different areas and to look at women’s relation to present society.Women’s studies began outside the state education system, in evening classes and summer schools or informal study groups. They broke from the hierarchy of teacher and taught. Women students had as much to say and explore about what it meant to be a woman as the woman tutor. Expectations were examined along with ideas. The dynamic was away from competitiveness and towards ‘an atmosphere that is supportive both intellectually and emotionally’. Women have succeeded in taking women’s studies into the university curriculum, but not without a fight. As Mary Moyer wrote: ‘Departments and universities have been slow to accept - much less welcome - a development which threatens the traditional approach to learning’ (SR.15). But teachers of women’s studies are now facing the problem of whether their courses, by being incorporated into the exam system, lose the original aims and become just another subject. Liz Waugh wrote, ‘What are we to conclude if a girl “fails” Women’s Studies. That she’s not a good feminist?’ (SR.75). 
Feminist SubversionMARGARET EDNEYThe John Clark Academy is a summer school for American students. It tries to be a summer school with a difference:The aim of the J C A Educational centre is to create courses and educational materials which allow the participants to discover for themselves the use of conceptualization, for the understanding of the situations they are in and the phenomena they encounter. The idea is to show conceptions of the world which liberate and add to perception and experience rather than constrain and stultify. Participants are taught how to think rather than what to think; and they are encouraged to become actively involved and utilize a wide range of their talents and skills and perceptions rather than to be passive recipients. For this reason even course includes considerable use of the field seminar which is designed to provoke and then analyse the nature of response. (JCA Prospectus)The scheduled courses are approximately five weeks and are residential. University accommodation throughout the country is utilized since a comprehensive tourist trip of England is part of the deal, although the major part of the time is spent in Yorkshire. Courses in archaeology, architecture, cinema, the mood of the times, the novel, culture and society, etc. are offered and students usually sign on for two or more.The Academy was started some years ago by some friends who saw it eventually funding a large community project. This year, they decided that liberating experiences weren’t quite enough and that some radical content was needed to season the brew. So, partly because they wanted to give some jobs to the girls and partly because it was fashionable and partly because they supported (in a myopic fashion) women’s liberation, a course called ‘Women in Society’ was added to the syllabus. Tricia Langton and I were asked to be tutors for the course and we accepted, knowing that, to some extent, we were being used but hoping that we might also do some using. We wanted to see what could be done in such a short space of time and we had lofty ideas of preparing an all-purpose women’s liberation education kit. We also entertained fantasies of self-help clinics and women’s centres being part of the eventual community project.Since the J C A needed a prospectus of the course, our initial approach was formal and we set out a list of seminars as follows:Seminars 1, 2. Introduction. The fundamental questions, who oppresses women? In what ways are women oppressed? Are women the most fundamentally oppressed and hence potentially the most revolutionary group in society? What is women’s concrete situation in contemporary society? Seminars 3, 4, 5. Historical and cross-cultural study. Case studies including underdeveloped countries: US, Britain, France, Ireland, South Africa, Algeria, Vietnam, China, Cuba and Russia.Seminars 6, 7. Women in contemporary British society. Economic position, ideological position and political roles.Seminars 8, 9. Physiology and Psychology. The female stereotype and its validity. The wife-mother syndrome. The spinster. The lesbian. Alternative roles.Seminar 10. Women and commercial exploitation. Advertising, TV, and films.Seminar 11. Woman in control of her own body. Abortion. Contraception. Sterilization.Seminar 12. The women’s movement in Britain and the future. Plus suggested background reading: Women’s Estate by Juliet Mitchell, The Second Sex by Simone de Beauvoir, Sisterhood is Powerful, The Body Politic, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State by F. Engels, The Dialectics of Sex by Shulamith Firestone, The Female Eunuch by Germaine Greer, Women, Resistance and Revolution by Sheila Rowbotham and Women and the Subversion of the Community by Maria Rosa Dalla Costa.A couple of weeks before the start of the summer school, a planning weekend was arranged and we met some more new members of staff who had been brought into tutor courses in English education (with emphasis on the open classroom). There were five men and one woman, all much older than us. They were education specialists and had a different conception of, and approach to, learning since they had all spent years as teachers, headmasters, etc. The ‘Women in Society’ course was a puzzle to them and they were apprehensive about assigning a role to Tricia and me. They alternated between patronizing us and totally ignoring us. At one meeting where the idea of the students meeting immigrant workers (male) as part of their environmental studies was mooted, we pointed out that there were also female immigrants with even more difficult problems. ‘Of course, yes, we’ll have a woman as well, yes of course, what a good idea - how could we have forgotten it.’ For them, our casual style of dress and our independent behaviour were ‘such a pity in such nice girls’. Chivalry and protection were their main methods of approach. They rushed to open doors, pay for drinks and leapt to their feet when we entered a room. However when it came to deciding what to do, arranging schedules or discussing projects, all consideration for us fled. They tried to control and dominate. Lip service only was paid to our course. In one breath they would be saying ‘how interesting’ and in the next calling a girl a nymphomaniac. When the word was objected to they said testily, ‘Oh well, replace it with sexually liberated girl then.’ We felt we had to assert ourselves since neither we nor the course were being taken seriously. We were fripperies- the icing on the cake. So we became difficult and aggressive to counteract this image, which resulted in us being laughed at as the ‘women’s libbers ‘, since their desire to categorize us, pigeonhole us (and then forget us) was so strong. This strengthened our desire to confront and upset their bureaucratic attitudes; we had become stereotypes and had lost our identity. So we rebelled- we went for a walk in the garden instead of going to meetings- we ordered the wildest, most expensive things on the menu - we laughed at them openly - we were generally subversive. ‘You have certainly made it clear that you are women’, we were told, at the end of the weekend.       Alison Fell, SR.43, February 1976Their over-authoritarianism and their refusal to break down the pupil-teacher relationship provoked us into altering our conception of the course. Total informality was our theme and we now felt it important to relate to all the women in the school, nor just those assigned to ‘Women in Society’. We would try to make our presence felt at all times and to relate what we were trying to say to all the courses, to weave a contrapuntal, if subversive, theme. After all, this should complement the open education philosophy of the school.The first seminar was at Oxford. There were over sixty students, mostly women, with an age-range of sixteen to eighty and with very different aims and expectations. Twelve had signed on for the ‘Women in Society’ course. In the first seminar we discussed endlessly what we thought our approach would be. Firstly, to try and get rid of the desk and chairs, the hierarchical lecture set-up and replace it with a more relaxed grouping. Then to explain that we thought a fairly informal structure would be more appropriate for the course since it would give us space to get to know each other’s consciousness. Formal lectures were already assigned, and we would be available at all times for discussion and as potential resource material. We wanted the main emphasis to be on a conscious analysis of one’s own direct experience.It would be patently absurd for two women to sit and lecture another group of women about their role in society. Every waking minute of their lives they experienced the slights, insults, hurts, oppressions (and occasional delights) of being women. By talking together, raising the surface discontents and reactions to each other, and exploring our common experience we could work towards a rediscovery of ourselves. The pupil-teacher relationship would dissolve and with it hopefully the inertia of the passive student who merely takes in and does not give out. They might begin to question what they were doing and what was happening. For example, why were the students mostly women and the teachers mostly men at the Academy? How did the men relate as teachers to the women? What kind of attitudes did they display? What kind of relationship or dynamic was set up? Clearly, this was a bit difficult for the women to adjust to immediately, so for the rest of the seminar, I talked... about the lack of female identity, in the sense that it is imposed from outside, about the contradictory images put out by the media - pretty, silly, sexy, childish, inefficient, but also perfect mother; about the family, its relationship to the stare and its maintenance of patriarchy. Gradually the women joined in the discussion and the seminar extended as argument raged. ‘But I like men opening doors for me,’ wailed one woman. ‘Well, for every door I’ve had opened, there’ve been ten slammed in my face,’ retorted another. We had started.Reasons for coming to the summer school seemed to be varied. They were all teachers or training to be teachers, so it was possible to pick up some graduate credits (which mean salary increments). Some had come for a good time or to pick up an English husband/lover, others to absorb English culture or try a new experience and still others who took the courses seriously.Jean Gardiner came and gave an invited lecture on Women and the Economy which seemed to shock and horrify a lot of the students who were comparatively well-off. The school then de-camped, first to York University and then to Bradford University. Tricia and I moved in with them for two weeks. The students had a very full schedule, apart from lectures, seminars, education workshops and field trips, there were numerous excursions and social events. We asked the women to try and meet us for a small period each day, apart from our assigned seminars, to assess and analyse our experiences. We wanted them to observe, listen and question, all the time- to become agents provocateurs in a sense. Meanwhile, we tried to be always available and always prepared to talk. We kept sherry and biscuits in our rooms so that women could come in for a drink and chat whenever they felt like it. We drove buses, we participated in all the excursions, field trips and social occasions, and we took part in as many other seminars and workshops as possible.Older married women responded to us immediately and told us of their struggles to keep their jobs and bring up families and their triumph at leaving their husbands to come to Europe on their own. With most of the women of our own age there was a more gradual identification as we tentatively discussed sexuality and emotional problems. They talked endlessly about their oppression in school by a male­ dominated staff-control structure. No interest at all was shown by the few women dedicated to the sexual competitive stakes, in fact there to sometimes hostility since we were, in their eyes, potential competitors. We used mealtimes for extra discussion, although hampered by the familiar breakfast scene of some man or other drawing up his chair and saying, ‘What women’s liberation ought to do...’ or ‘I think women’s liberation is wonderful but why aren’t you thinking about men?’ After a week I made a badge saying, ‘I eat men for breakfast.’ ‘Tsk, tsk, how aggressive,’ they replied.Within the university we asked the women to talk to the cooks, the cleaners, and the bed-makers and to watch how they were treated by the men. Also to scrutinize the running of the J C A itself, to notice over-loaded secretaries being asked to dial telephone numbers for men who were idly tapping their own big, strong fingers. On field trips to villages and towns we asked them to try and establish female profiles. Where were the women, what were they doing and what was their relation to the community? The other tutors had asked them to pick up bits of brick and leaves, to do charcoal rubbings of manhole cover and to photograph ducks. We suggested they find out the population, sex, age, class ratios, the recreation facilities, available transport, shops, prices, nurseries, schools, ranges of goods and work prospects. School visits could be used to answer who plays with who, who sits next to who, who teaches who and what is being taught. By the time we visited a Bradford wool mill, there was no need to indicate what to question: the infernal incessant noise, the choking fumes and the appalling wages were all too self-evident.Our dialogue with the educationalists continued as we moved in on their craft workshops. The general idea was that you used any medium to explore some aspects of the field trips. This was not actually our scheduled province as we were supposed to be using the time to prepare our own seminars. By participating as students with the students we hoped to demystify the idea of us being teachers. Having collected all the local newspapers, we cut out everything we could find about women and made wall newspapers around the themes, work, leisure and home, which tried to point out some of the contradictions (like the part-time jobs offered which were, in fact, a six-hour day). We also made comic strips, diagrams of Bradford facts and figures and a giant cartoon. Surreptitiously, women left their own education project work to help us and when it was finished we covered the foyer of the main dining-room with our efforts. ‘Well, you certainly work hard, whatever else...’ was the male tutor’s comment. Later on some of the displays were ripped down although no one would say why.The film course also provided a forum for discussion. The tutor interpreted the films we watched in terms of Jungian archetypes (man seeking salvation fleeing from devouring mother). This was rejected quite violently by a lot of the women who saw it as women fighting desperately to get out of oppressive material circumstances but ultimately being crushed and destroyed. After much pressure The Salt of the Earth was shown. It’s about a strike in New Mexico which only succeeds when women join the struggle. Cheers, clapping and stamps of applause went on throughout the film and afterwards the women supported it vehemently against attacks by male students and tutors.In social situations we made a point of dancing together, of buying drinks, of commandeering buses and cars, of leaving field trips early so that we could go out for tea and buns or of skipping workshops to go shopping instead. This was to show that women could enjoy themselves together and not be dependent on men in social situations. At Batley Variety Club where we were taken en masse for a night out, we had to sit through a cabaret full of sexist and racist jokes. As a reaction we took over the small dance floor and had a wonderful time – sixty slightly drunk and very happy women really bopping and enjoying each other’s company.When the school moved to London we asked Sheila Rowbotham to talk on the history of the women’s liberation moment but to relate it to her own history and to her move from Yorkshire to the south and the differences and problems when encountered. Most of the women said they felt a lot of identification with what Sheila satd. They had experienced the cultural and environmental differences between the north and the south but more immediate was their understanding of Sheila’s description of awakening sexuality, attitudes to men, and confusion over what society wanted her to be and what she felt she was.The school was nearly at an end and there was a weekend in which to accomplish whatever project work the tutors required. We suggested a collective attempt at a newspaper which we could print and hand out at the leaving party. It was tackled with great enthusiasm once we had shown them how to lay out etc. and its distribution created quite a stir at the party- ‘wonderful’ said the women, “not as hasty as we thought it might be,’ said the men.Was it worth the total exhaustion and shattered nerves we now felt? What had we learned? What had the students learned? Well, there was plenty of response, not just from the women who had signed up for the course but from women throughout the school who felt free to join our seminars and meetings whenever they could. Similarly there was a great deal of social response from everyone and a genuine delight in all female subversive activities. Discussions were intense and when personal histories were revealed a great deal of warmth and solidarity were generated. One student said it had changed her whole outlook on life, others were excited at having discovered collective activity and were making plans to produce their own newspaper in the States and yet others were totally unmoved.The book list has been a mistake since no one looked at it nor did they use the magazine and pamphlet stall that we maintained. This could have been a reflection of cultural differences which we hadn’t really thought out beforehand such as, quite an advanced type of bourgeois-feminist consciousness going hand-in-hand with reactionary social attitudes. A world-view was lacking in their approach to life Women’s liberation had meant to them wild, bra-burning shriekers. They were more at home with N O W (National Organization of Women) which is a liberal civil rights type movement. Our relative gentleness surprised them and made them reconsider their attitude.Quite clearly, the internal structure of the course wasn’t thought out well enough, although fortunately we were able to learn as we went along and adapt our approach. Women can’t just suddenly open up and think creatively or raise their consciousness if they’ve been educated and trained to keep their minds closed. The balance between formal lecturing and informal discussion has to be carefully worked out. Our fundamental mistake was not to realize that our informal structure had to work within a rigidly formal structure. Our casual attitudes were interpreted as meaning that we were not to be taken seriously. As tutors we were given the worst rimes in a crowded timetable, the times that nobody else wanted, the times when the students were exhausted. We were given least resources and least consideration. The decision that Tricia and I took to share the course, although it meant sharing the salary, proved to be correct. From the outset, we had insisted that it be a joint venture but the school understood this to be doing half each- in terms of time. We had to fight to be allowed to work together and throughout the course it was vitally important in terms of our solidarity and sanity. We are still receiving letters from some of the women and that in itself makes it worthwhile but I won’t forget the huge bunches of flowers they gave us when they left. We both wept.SR.20, February 1974NEWSHORTSeven thirteen-year-old girls at Attwood Comprehensive in Maiden­ head raised a 100-signature petition and threatened to report their headmaster to the E O C when he tried to push them out of a car­ maintenance class. Headmaster Maurice Edwards claimed the class was over-subscribed but the girls told him ‘You have a mixed class or none at all.’ He checked the law and gave in - it’s large, and mixed.SR.71, June 1978 
Schoolgirls up against SexismDEBRA PEART, TWELVE YEARS, LEEDSI have recently moved to Leeds and am attending a middle school. During my time here I have been put out a little by the attitudes of some of the teachers towards the girls. In the games lessons the girls have a choice: rounders, tennis and sometimes volley ball in the       Caroline Jacksonsummer, and in the winter hockey and netball. But the boys have a much more varied choice: rounders, tennis, softball, volley ball and cricket in the summer, and rugby or football in the winter. A lot of the girls fancy cricket and football, and even rugby. The boys laugh at us­ it’s not surprising really. They would win in a game because no one will teach us. My friend and I decided to ask our games master if we could learn. I saw him in the dinner line, and I asked him about the girls playing football etc. He gave a surprising answer. ‘Have you been listening to the radio?’ ‘No,’ I said. ‘Well, as long as I’m running the games around here, the girls won’t do any of the boys’ games.’ He then walked off. It’s impossible to say anything to our headmaster, as he’s a male chauvinist pig as well.But even if we cannot play football we are expected to read about it. When we were given our class reading book, the class went in uproar­ the girls did anyway. The book was called The Goalkeeper’s Revenge, and when sifting through it, I saw a paragraph saying, ‘This book is for boys, about boys. Rugby, fighting, trolley driving and football.’ That is typical of my school’s opinion on girls- we are classed second, while the boys must have what suits them.Although there are mixed classes for needlework, cookery and wood­work, the work we do is different. In needlework, the girls have to make aprons, and the boys make ties or cravats. This is stupid, because both boys and girls need aprons for cookery. So when we asked the teacher the reason for this, she replied, ‘The girls are willing to stay in at breaks and finish their aprons, while the boys would like to go out and play football.’I would like the opportunity next year to do all subjects which I am interested in but I am barred from at present. Instead I am being guided towards girl subjects which usually end up in family care and childcare. I know there is a recognizable movement against all these things which degrade us and exclude us. Soon something’s going to happen to make it right for us, but it may take time.JENNY SMITH, FOURTEEN YEARS, MIDDLESEXI am at a mixed grammar school, and when I first came here, I didn’t think it was particularly sexist, as I had come from a very sexist junior school, where girls were taught they should play with dolls, and boys to be Big and Tough (and beat each other up).So the sexism at my new school did not seem so blatant, because the boys were allowed to do cookery and needlework, and the girls do woodwork and metalwork. However I soon discovered that sexism gets everywhere. In my first week we had a history lesson in which were were learning about Mohammed and Islam. The (male) teacher asked me if I would like to be a Muslim. I said no, and he asked why. Apart from the fact that I am an atheist and saw no reason to change my religion, I said that I did not agree with purdah and male chauvinism. He said, ‘Are you one of those women’s libbers, then, girl?’ I said yes, to which he replied, ‘Oh mah gawd, we’ve got a right one ‘ere.’ I thought I must be some sort of crank because everyone, including the other girls, laughed. I only had a vague idea of what ‘women’s lib was, but I knew I supported it because the ‘women’s libbers’ everyone hated were the only people who didn’t just want to stop me doing things I considered worthwhile just because I was a girl.There’s a history teacher at our school who never stops insulting women. He says we never stop ‘gossiping’- he never shuts up himself. Once in a lesson on Nazi Germany he told us how clever Hitler was to stop all married women from working, because it solved unemployment, and that the British government should do the same thing. Recently he gave us a test, and worked out that the average boy’s mark was 1.5 higher than the average girl’s. He said this proved that men are superior to women. How stupid can you get?In an art lesson once the (female) teacher said: ‘Today we are going to draw aeroplanes. The ladies [sic] may like to draw birds instead.’ I drew an aeroplane. In a geography lesson, the (male) teacher complained about my untidy map, saying, ‘I thought girls were supposed to be able to draw neatly.’ And there are innumerable examples of teachers making this sort of remark.At my school the head teacher, the deputy head, and the heads of block are all males. There’s a senior mistress, but no senior master, presumably because they think the head will always be a man, anyway. All the senior mistress does is to tell the girls off for wearing the wrong colour blouse or something. Last year, all the fourth-year girls had to attend a lecture on the follies of wearing high-heeled shoes. The boys didn’t have to go! To make this even more patronizing, the lecturer was a man. If this happens again next year (when I’m in the fourth year) we shall try to organize a boycott.Obviously most text books are sexist. I once went through my school physics book and counted eighty pictures of people doing experiments. Only one of these was a girl, all the rest were male. In the series of French books used at our school from first to fifth year, the girls are always shown staying at home helping their mothers with the housework, while the boys are out fishing, and their fathers are at work. Other text books, and teachers, constantly refer to the human race as ‘Man’. If you ask why, they reply that it means women too. Of course it doesn’t. Man means men, and has nothing to do with the other half of the human race which is female.There is a great deal of opposition to feminism among the pupils as well as the staff. The boys just laugh at it, and often make it clear that they don’t like us trespassing on male preserves like the metalwork room. While the girls are afraid of being ridiculed if people think they are ‘women’s libbers’- they never say feminist.When I ask people why they are sexist, they always say that people are different, and if we had equality, everyone would be the same. (The usual Tory line.) They don’t seem to realize that the individuality of women - and men too - is suppressed by the sexism which flourishes under capitalism. Obviously at an old-fashioned grammar school like mine, you’d expect to find rigid attitudes, but there is sexism in every school. The way it is drummed into us is indeed what some people actually mean by education. Judging by the attitudes of people my own age, and the way we are being conditioned at school, sexism is definitely alive and kicking, and will survive for a long time to come.SR.75, October 1978
It’s Trousers Time!SUSAN HEMMINGSThe problem at Isabel, Jayne and Sylvia’s junior school is basically with a very strict headmistress who doesn’t like girls in trousers. If they wear them, she gives them a good telling off. When common sense prevailed on her to let them wear them through the snow to school, she still insisted that when they arrived they had to change into skirts. And if it was very cold in school, they could wear the trousers... with a skirt over them!Most of the teachers at this junior school are women, and they wear trousers. They don’t want to tell the girls off, but they’ll get into trouble if they don’t make them change. And most of the mothers, too, like their girls in trousers at home, and don’t really see why they shouldn’t wear them to school, but definitely don’t want their girls breaking school rules.One day this October, Isabel, Jayne and Sylvia decided enough was enough, and made a plan with their friends to all turn up in trousers the next day. They all had sleepless nights worrying if the others would be able to, and, sure enough, several parents put a stop to it. Still, those three and a couple of others managed to wear them, and two of them kept them on all day. ‘At lunchtime we felt really sick, because the head walks about then and can see us. We kept behind the other girls. Other children kept saying to us, why are you wearing them? Are we allowed? And we said, we want to. The thing is, everyone is so scared of getting into trouble. Lots of them agree with us - but they won’t take the risk of getting told off: It is difficult in junior schools - especially for the fourth- (final) year students, whose behaviour record goes forward to secondary school and might affect their chances there.They don’t dislike wearing skirts. ‘But you can’t do so many things in them. You can’t run or climb, because you have to wear special shoes with skirts, you can’t just wear plimsolls. Skirts blow around in the playground, and the boys are always lifting them up. In trousers you can sit more comfortably on the floor. Your legs are protected when you fall over. You are generally much freer.’ They’ve been told that if they wore trousers, they’d get the hems wet on the toilet floors... and that they’d get sweaty... ‘Well, if all those things are true, boys should wear shorts.’In any case they don’t agree with being told what to wear. ‘They’re just trying to get us trained for when we have to wear uniform at secondary school, and we don’t agree with that either. It’s got nothing to do with what you learn or how you behave.’ They are considering ways to get more support for their trousers protest, especially from mothers and teachers. ‘Even people who don’t want us to break rules should see that it’s a nonsense rule, and if they don’t want it broken, it should be changed.’SR.89, December 1979
Ten Ways to Counter Sexism in a Junior SchoolSALLY SHAVE1 I teach on a one-to-one basis. It’s exhausting, but it lessens the need for the children to conform.2 I dress and behave in school, and use the same language and mannerisms as I do in the community, with parents and friends, hoping to lessen the gap between school and home.3 I’ve made sure the school purchased and uses a varied reading scheme consisting of non-sexist books. And we always discuss the sexism in traditional stories, like Cinderella, and often reverse the roles in such stories.4 I never, even for the slightest convenience, divide the children into boys and girls, for any activity.5 I never co-operate with other teachers’ requests for ‘Four strong boys to move these boxes, please.’ I train the girls to lift and carry - very difficult at first.6 I introduced and encourage mixed sports. The boys love mixed netball and hate mixed football.7 In sewing and cookery which the boys do I always oppose suggestions that the boys will grow up homosexual (by parents or children) by asking why this would be such a bad thing anyway.8 The children change for P E and swimming in mixed sex groups.9 I encourage the girls to wear jeans and easygoing clothes and to get dirty if necessary.10 We have discussions on sex, family life, and different ways of life in the community. I never give them the ‘beauty of sex and the mystery of life’ talk.SR.75, October 1978
Acting it OutJASMINE, DIANE, CYNTHIA, LINDA, DAWN...Although we’d noticed sexism, and thought it unfair, it wasn’t that which made us angry at first. What really pissed us off, very early on in this school, was streaming. Right from the beginning the teachers started calling us thick. Yes, they tell you outright, to your face. ‘Has anyone ever told you you’re thick?’ Fucking hell! What is this? We’ve been really angry and upset, and this has been going on for five years. And then they have the nerve to write on your report that your trouble is you’ve no confidence. Well, how the hell could we have confidence? And when we were confident, about the play, they told us off for being big-headed. So it all started with that, with being labelled thick.Our school has eight streams. When you come into this school, if you’re Black, or working-class white, or coloured, or Greek or Turkish Cypriots, you automatically get put into the lower streams. Recently a girl of fourth-year age came back again to this area from spending more time in Jamaica. The teacher said to one of us who is Black, ‘What stream are you in?’ On hearing it was stream four, he said, ‘Yes, that’s the one I was thinking of for her’, and that was it! Sometimes a Black person, or a white working-class one, might make it into a higher stream. The other children can’t believe it. ‘What’s that thickie doing in here?’ Our new headmaster says he’s going to end streaming, and we hear people say all the time, ‘Thank goodness we’re not coming into the new first form. I’d hate to be taught with all the thickies.’ And we’ve got a teacher at the moment who’s just told us that people who don’t get ‘A’ levels are boring people.We’ve had nothing but this sort of thing all the time - racist comments, thickies, dunces. We reckoned we’d start with a play on sexism, and if we can get that out, maybe it’s a start on getting the whole thing out. Sexism, racism, streaming and class- it’s all the same system, and it’s all got to come out...SR.85, August 1979
No More School MealsJILL NICHOLLS... The government’s Education Bill, published on 26 October and now going through committee, leaves it entirely up to local authorities to decide what meals and milk to provide. All they would have to offer would be a place for children to eat packed lunches. You’ll be glad to know that the Bill explicitly states that they ‘would not be empowered to charge pupils bringing their own food’. Great!For children from families claiming supplementary benefit or family income supplement, local authorities would have to ‘ensure that any necessary provision was made for them in the middle of the day’, free of charge. But this qualifying level is much lower than at present, so half a million children who now get free meals would no longer be entitled to them. And the Bill does not specify what ‘necessary provision’ is- ‘I hope they provide more than a bowl of soup and an apple,’ says Mr Carlisle, but his Bill does not insist that they do...SR.89, December 1979
Diary of a Feminist TeacherKATE ELLIOTTIn May last year, Kate Elliot took on a part-time ‘supply’ reaching job in a girls’ comprehensive school. Much of her work was in social studies, with a group of fourth-year girls waiving to leave. This group disliked school intensely, and were locked in a mutual antagonism with most of the teachers.Kate decided to keep a diary of her progress with this class, because she felt that the power relationships between herself and the girls were something she wanted to work out within the context of her commitment to feminism. These are some of the extracts from the notebook she kept.       1977 MayThe hostility met me like a perspex wall- twenty-three individual versions of it.Me: I hear you’ve had quite a rough time this year.Yvonne: We’re the class they all talk about in the staffroom – like that Miss Robinson. We give her hell.Trisha: No good giving me detentions, I’ve got ten a week already­ can’t fit any more in.Yvonne: Can we stand up in your class? Like we get really bad if they try to make us sit down in rows.Margaret was combing her hair, her back towards me. Most of the other were talking to each other. So I thought, they’re testing me, keep calm... but I’ve done ten years in this job, and what have I learnt? Who am I?Me: Look, we’ve got nine weeks together and I’ve no wish for it to be hell every lesson. Why shouldn’t you walk around? I do. Stand on your heads if you need to. We need to talk to each other. We don’t know each other.Although Kate’s job was supposed to end after those nine weeks, it was offered again to her from the next September, and so she became their teacher again, this time in their fifth and final year of compulsory schooling. And so she continued her diary.       1977 SeptemberYouth unemployment now began to force its way into the consciousness of the girls.Eileen: What’s the point of doing all this work in school? It isn’t going to make it any more likely I’ll get a job. I’ve got three friends with ‘O’ levels and C S Es who are Black like me, and they’re all unemployed. They’ll just have me up for an interview with six white girls, they’ll see me... and it’s the Blacks who get no jobs.It seems to me that the whole ‘education debate’ has successfully deflected criticism away from who controls industry, and from the economic crisis (of which youth and Black unemployment are two aspects), on to the schools, seeing the blame as the failure of teachers to provide young people with the ‘correct’ skills and attitudes for the needs of industry’.Streaming divides up the girls in this school in both obvious and subtle ways, and the girls themselves have ambivalent attitudes to it. This group regard the top streamers as foolish, giving too much time and effort to the school. Yet it isn’t unusual for bottom streamers to spend whole evenings working on school projects which interest them. Girls in the top stream regard the others as disruptive and willing to learn, yet envy them for their time and boyfriends. But for all of them the illusion of choice of employment is maintained, in spite of the fact that neither ‘O’ levels nor CSEs are guarantees against setbacks and disappointments under the current unemployment situation.At about this time Kate began to talk to other teachers who might be feeling the same way as she did. Most sympathy was to be found among teachers in the English and Remedial departments, and not insignificantly this arose out of their focus upon talking in the classroom.       1977 OctoberThis is an all-girls school, but the girls were always focusing their attention on boys.Una (while working on a project about housing): Miss, what would you wear to go with a brown pleated skirt?Me: Why?Una: There’s this dishy boy who’s not like the ordinary ones, slobbing around in jeans- he wears suits and he’s smart.Me: Why not dress as you usually do?Una: I’ve got to impress him - you’ve got to catch him first.Yvonne and Trisha arrived ten minutes later.Me: Hey, you’re taking me for granted because I’m nice to you.Trisha: What do you mean? Now you look here, Miss. We’re only ten minutes late. You should think yourself lucky, we’re ever so good to you. Look at all this work - pages and pages.(She showed me her project and Yvonne did the same.)Me: You mean I’m privileged because it’s only ten minutes, and that I should count my blessings?Trisha: Yes, you expect too much.I am very aware of the problem of my control over them. I view it as part of my work to enable them to make a critical examination of their position and mine. I don’t want them to see me as one of their pals, because that could blur their awareness of all the structures in school which reproduce power relationships, dominating them here, at home and in their future work. If you discuss explicit aspects of domination with the girls, you are immediately viewed as a subversive by the prevailing hierarchy here.       1978 JanuaryElizabeth came boiling into the lesson.Elizabeth: Miss, did you see The South African Experience on T V? I was so angry. The way the Blacks are treated there. This woman was given the sack after twenty-three years and no reason, and the white man in the car factory saying the Blacks live like that. Well, my mum’s a nurse, and she has to bow to the matron above her, treated like dirt because she’s Black, and she’s brought me up never to take it. If I was in South Africa I’d want to fight. I’m not just angry - I can’t explain how I feel. I’d just want to explode. I know not all the Blacks even want a revolution, but me, I would. I’d want to die for it. But they wouldn’t let me in - they only let whites in. And they put us down over here as well. I know you shouldn’t lump all whites together, but we’re all lumped together, especially here in school. I don’t agree with fighting for the sake of it - you’ve got to know what you’re fighting for.This was the first time that she had explained her ideas so strongly and we met here emotionally and intellectually in a way not previously achieved. How can I make this happen more frequently?Elizabeth is called the following things in the staffroom: troublemaker, disruptive, thick, thoroughly unpleasant, remedial, immature. Two weeks later: Elizabeth is suspended for a fortnight, following an incident of ‘unco-operativeness’ in another lesson. Her English teacher and I negotiate on her behalf whenever we can. Decide who you are, find others like you, and then fight.       1978 FebruaryLinda: Miss, if one of us was to tell you she was pregnant, what would you do?Me: I’d help her all I could. Why?Linda: Would you tell her parents for her?Me: Yes, I’d go to the clinic as well. I’d do whatever I could.Linda: Well, we’ve been going together for two years. My doctor would kill me, he said to go on the Pill after I was sixteen, but I never did. My boyfriend says he’ll stand by me - we’re engaged, but... I don’t know. I just had to tell somebody.Later: Linda has now found out that she is not pregnant. She left at Easter as she’d already been promised a job as a dental nurse, which she’d been doing on Saturdays for ages. Most of the girls already do a great deal of domestic work, taking a very large part in running the home along with their working mothers. All have a large amount of it built into their lives, and some, like Una, run their homes without a mother. Most are anticipating early marriage and motherhood in spite of the resistance they already feel to these stereotypes.Eileen: We have lots of housework to do. Every night me and Angela take turns with the washing up. It’s me tonight.Me: Do the boys do it?Eileen and Frances: No! They don’t do anything - we do it all. I often think it’s us waiting on them while they watch TV. We’ve always had to do it.Now the group is splitting into Easter leavers, and those who are staying to take the June CSE exam. The first group mark time - school is even more irrelevant. They are making some tape recordings about their feelings about school and what they expect of the future. And the second group are slogging away at revision. This means we are controlled by the imminence of the exam, and have no more time for free discussions.       1978 MarchWe’ve got problems over the tape recording. The girls had talked about their past, present and future sexuality and the head has asked me to stop this work, on the grounds that further taping would be construed as deliberately soliciting this material. All radical teachers walk on a tightrope, and feminist teachers trying, like me, to create spaces with young women to talk about our own issues and problems face a particularly painful and exhausting struggle.       1978 MayThe revision group is now approaching their exam - it’s half term and we’re all at screaming point. So we’ve changed back again to a less constraining content, using role play as our revision method, and this has, on the surface, eased our situation.Last lesson: a visit to the Old Bailey. And on the steps of St Pauls, they hand me a card saying, ‘Remember us? Love from...’        1978 JuneWe are beginning to form a women’s group among the teachers here. When we first put up a notice about it in the staff room, a male colleague replaced it by a clever negative cartoon. One of the men had drawn a picture of a group of women tied on to chairs with books on their laps, with the captions,‘Shoulder to Shoulder’ and ‘Forced Reading’- there was little doubt who those women were meant to be.Our group now consists of open and closed meetings. We have designed a liberal studies (women’s studies) course which includes the study of misconceptions of women, violence, work, domestic labour, and other cultures. The closed group, of about six, meets for consciousness raising, and it looks as though another parallel group may start.The girls we have worked with have been crucial in the formation of our group identity- and the contradiction is that these girls are not part of our group. Nor are the other women workers in the school. I want to do something about that. But in any case, we are at the beginning of an exciting new phase.SR.75, October 1978[Kate Elliot now calls herself Caeia March. Ed.]	       Korbet, from ‘Women and Education’, SR.67, February 1978 
Working with GirlsVAL CARPENTER...Youth work means working and building relationships with young people, either in particular clubs or premises like schools, church halls etc., or in places where young people go, like pubs, street corners, or wherever they happen to be. The problem is that not only do girls stay away from youth clubs, they also don’t hang around street corners, so they are almost invisible in the youth service....Once you become a committed feminist, boys start to react to you more aggressively. If you show them your attitude towards their sexism, their knowledge of your feminism can increase the violence you want to dispel. We learnt that the more energy we put into girls, the more the boys and men would feel threatened.Besides discussing these sorts of problems, we also got down to looking at the ways we were treating the girls. We began to develop an awareness together of how we were neglecting them: when I’d go back from our meetings to the club, I’d be horrified at what I was doing. All my close relationships were with the boys, all my energy and time went to them. With the girls it was just, ‘Hallo, how’s tricks?’ and that’s all­ nothing. So I made a commitment to get closer to them. At first they just weren’t interested, but what I didn’t realize was that I wasn’t picking up the right signals, or I was ignoring them.But one night there was a big disco, and I was very busy, whizzing about ensuring that things were running smoothly, and I just put my head around the door of the girls’ toilets. My response would usually be, ‘What do you want to hang around there for, there’s lots of nicer places to be’, and try to encourage them out. So crazy: it never occurred to me it was the only place they could be on their own without boys. Anyway, this time one of the girls said, ‘Come on, ask her, she’ll tell you.’ I replied, ‘Come on, quick, what?’ ‘Go on, ask her.’ ‘No, you.’ And they all started laughing, till one of them said, ‘Tell us, have we got three holes down there, or two?’ I suddenly realized that this was important, and that this sort of thing happened to me countless times, and that I’d been too busy to pick it up. We’ve been encouraged all our life to put down women’s talk - and I’d fallen right into that trap.Anyway, we had this most amazing talk together. We stayed in there the whole evening, didn’t go to the disco at all, talking about so many things. It caused a terrible scene because all the boys were outside wanting to come in - why were there no girls dancing? In the end the caretaker threw us out. It was a school-based club that closed at 10.30, but we were still outside at a quarter to twelve. The girls were avid for information, and wanting to share their experiences.So that was how girls’ work in my club really got started...SR.94, May 1980
Sex with Your Tutor? It’s His Fringe BenefitDEBORAH CAMERONWhen I began my university course, the first lecture was given by the professor of English literature, an urbane little man who announced he was pleased to welcome a class of ‘such clever young men and beautiful young ladies’. At the time, I gritted my teeth and dismissed the remark as a triviality. It wasn’t. On the contrary, the most serious problem facing women at college is the attitude which made that remark possible.... Classroom harassment runs through the whole familiar spectrum, from the uncomfortable feeling you are being eyed up, through suggestive remarks, jokes, groping, to ‘serious’ propositions of sex. Tutors do not ignore the personal and intellectual qualities of their female students, but these come second to burning questions like, ‘Is she attractive?’ ‘Will she or won’t she?’ No encounter or assessment remains free from this cattle-market mentality.... It is not unusual for women to sleep with their tutors; I did, and I spoke to others who did. In the ‘liberal’ ambience of the average university, such involvements are seen as personal matters, and tactfully ignored. But in fact, they arise directly from the attitudes and harassment I have described: sex for some tutors is just another perk of the job. The women I spoke to knew, or had discovered, that their tutors had slept with other students besides them. Reactions varied. When it happened to me, I was inclined to feel that my case was somehow different, but now I admit that I felt depersonalized, devalued and depressed, as if I had come off an assembly line for young, free, subordinate and available females. In effect, that was exactly what happened, but like most other women I suppressed my feelings about it for a long time. I rationalized my relationship because I couldn’t bear to examine it in political terms.For men, all this is very convenient. One of them told me it was a fantasy come true: ‘I get older every year, but the girls are always eighteen.’ He did not add the all-important point that when they are twenty-one they graduate and are thus eliminated before they start to make demands.... It is often said disparagingly of women that they cannot keep their academic and personal concerns apart. A bitter irony, since it is men who will not allow us to make the separation. We have to study and be assessed on terms which are not applied to men, but which men define. This state of affairs effectively debars us from full and equal participation in intellectual life.Recently I have been able to express and analyse my anger at what happens to women students, but I cannot feel optimistic about a solution to our problems. While our educational system is geared to approval seeking, and while men perceive women as they do - in a word, while patriarchy rules - things are unlikely to change much...SR.99, November 1980
7	THE ARTSArtwork- in pictures, words, music, performance - is a way of making meaning out of life; it asserts values, illuminates and communicates ideas. Unless women are active in the arts, and seen to be active, women’s lives are only portrayed from a male point of view. Women have always made art about their lives and their view of the world, no less than men. But their work has often been ridiculed and stereotyped on the basis of their sex, or, more recently, suppressed and kept from the public eye.Women artists have always painted despite institutional discrimination by guilds and academics; but their work has often been hidden. Women who use fabric and stitches rather than paint, for example, have their work demoted from fine art to craft, with its connotations of out-dated skill, limited imagination and marginal aesthetic value. Although this particular female art is gaining recognition, work that comes from a safe distance- such as the blankets woven by the Navajos - is still more readily exhibited.Even more than the plastic arts, both theatre and music need the active co·-operation of other people. They require performance halls and audiences, as well as a sense within the woman that she can move freely outside the home and domestic responsibility. In Spare Rib No 31 Marion Lees wrote about the composer Ethel Smyth (1858-1944) who had an independent income, along with feminism and a ‘hearty’ snobbery to propel her past problems. A Mass she composed was performed at the Royal Albert Hall in 1892, thanks to the intervention of Empress Eugenic- ‘very few girls live next door to rich Empresses of pronounced feminist sympathies’ was Ethel Smyth’s ironic comment.The big orchestras practise discrimination among performers such as advertising for both men and women but rarely auditioning the women who apply (SR.34). In 1974 the London Philharmonic Orchestra had seven women out of eighty-nine musicians, the B B C symphony had sixteen out of 105, and Covent Garden Opera had twelve out of ninety.When women in the Musicians’ Union had a conference to discuss discrimination they noted a difference between classical music where women played lyrical instruments, like violins, cellos and pianos, and the ‘jazz rock pop world’ where it was ‘far more difficult because they are immediately expected to be the singer- the one who puts the glamour on the stage’ (SR.36). When saxophonist Kathy Stobart, ‘an inspired jazz player’, met a B B C department head to discuss her band’s audition in 1950, she was met with ‘Why do you do what you do?’. Her stunned reaction led to a row and in 1977 Val Wilmer wrote in Spare Rib that ‘she has never broadcast to this day’.In theatre, women’s role has been largely confined to that of actress, often in subsidiary parts to those played by men. Michelene Wandor wrote that in addition to men having administrative control in theatre, their judgement of a play’s content and form dominated. Although on the surface they assessed the work in conventional terms, their bias was towards work that interests men: ‘women’s plays are so often rejected as either “not good enough” (artistic grounds) or “not interesting enough” (often ideological or political grounds)’ (SR.62). In film, too, women’s opportunities hinge on a sexual division of labour. Feminists active in the film union, A CTT, produced a report in 1974 revealing persistent discrimination which stops women from moving out of traditional areas of work like research, despite the adoption of equal pay in the industry since the late 1940s.The one area where women are acknowledged to have contributed to the evolution of a cultural form is novel-writing and even this has been subject to neglect. Mary Moyer in Spare Rib No. 15 cited the number of women writers studied in one university course as an example- there were seventeen compared to 313 male writers. Women poets have been the object of the same disappearing tricks. Cora Kaplan wrote in Spare Rib No. 68 that the love sonnets of Elizabeth Barrett Browning are her only poems popularized this century and they are made to appear as the ‘spontaneous outpouring of feeling rather than highly crafted poems by a mature poet’, while much of her late poetry that is ‘public and political’ is ignored.Feminism in the arts has begun to demystify the concept of the individual artist, apparently thrown up out of nowhere by the moving spirit of ‘his’ own genius. In every form- photography, film, dance, music, painting, plays, fiction, poetry- women have found it essential to form groups, not in order to cease creating as individuals, but in order to have a community in which to discuss and share ideas, and to make room for their work to be seen and heard. This has also provided the strength to oppose the pretence that cultural institutions are neuter and neutral, exposing them as bastions of male power and social privilege. In its demand for space within the institutions, feminism is not asking to be allowed in on the promise of silence, but demanding the right to public speech. 
Underground WomenGRISELDA POLLOCKI belong to a Women’s Art History Collective which is working on a feminist critique of cultural history. One obvious project is to find out about women artists of the past and I decided to do some research into Old Mistresses in the National Gallery. With a certain amount of detective work I discovered seven named women painters. This included Katerina van Hemessen (1527/ 8-66), a fine Netherlandish portraitist, Marie Blancour, a seventeenth-century still-life painter, and Judith Leyster, a Dutch contemporary and possibly rival of Frans Hals. Moving southwards, there was the Venetian Rosalba Carriera, who revolutionized the use of pastel in the eighteenth century, and Elizabeth Vigee-Lebrun, a favourite portrait painter at the court of Marie Antoinette. The National Gallery has two nineteenth-century women painters, Rosa Bonheur, who excelled in large-scale animal paintings, and Berthe Morisot, the impressionist.There are two other women who sneak in by the backdoor. Sofonisba Anguiscola (1538-1625) was thought to be the author of a Portrait of a Lady, but the attribution has since been changed. The catalogue now reads:Sofonisba Anguiscola,Attributed3817 Portrait of a LadyFormerly; possibly one of her sisters or Lavinia Fomanarather more probable candidate is a male painter, Bartolomeo Passarotti.(My italics)There is also a large painting of a Negro Woman which may be the work of Marie-Guilhemine Benoist (1769-1826), who was the pupil of Vigee-Lebrun and of the neoclassical painter David. This makes a possible total of nine women painters represented by thirteen paintings. Not one of these paintings is at present on exhibition on the main floors of the National Gallery. The first seven are all in the Reserve Collection in the basement; Benoist is in Dublin and Anguiscola in Leeds. Most museums do own more pictures than they have space to exhibit, and the excess is usually stored in some inaccessible basement, attic or suburban depository. Fortunately, the National Gallery Reserve Collection is open to the public. However, pictures ‘below stairs’ do not get VIP treatment. Instead, they are hung row upon row, screen upon screen, packed on to the walls from ceiling to floor, and more often than not, cordoned off from view. This makes it difficult not only to find them but also to get a decent look at them.I wrote to the Director of the National Gallery, Michael Levey, and asked why all the paintings by women were in the basement. He wrote back: ‘I do not have any policy about the pictures from the point of view of the sex of the painters.' He assured me that paintings moved up and down the stairs continually, but when I asked for exact dates when the paintings by women had been on show upstairs, he replied:‘...the Rosalba and the Leyster have been on exhibition in the Upper Floor Galleries in comparatively recent years. I think you would give a very misleading impression if you tried to put precise dates on this sort of information.’I do not doubt Mr Levey’s sincerity nor his good intentions, but the fact remains that only two out of a possible nine women have been       Marie Bashkirtseff, SR.34, April 1975exhibited with the main collection in ‘comparatively recent years’. I don’t believe that there is a conscious conspiracy on the part of the gallery staff to keep women out of the limelight. Works by women receive the same treatment that women themselves receive from society at large. Since women are almost universally second-class citizens, their works have second-class status and the National Gallery, probably unthinkingly, perpetuates this state of affairs.But the point is not just to notice that there are women painters represented in the National Gallery or to complain that all their paintings are in the basement. Even superficial research into the lives and experience of these women provides insights into the social and institutional factors affecting women’s chances of becoming artists and enables us to criticize the usual art historical biographies of male artists which ignore the critical economic and social circumstances.In the time of apprentice systems, all-male workshops and guilds, women had difficulty in obtaining training in their craft, but most of the National Gallery Nine by-passed this because they came from artistic families. Katerina van Hemessen learnt her skills from her father Jan van Hemessen, a successful painter himself. Rosa Bonheur was the daughter of a minor drawing master and had a sister, Juliette, and a brother, Auguste, who also became professional painters. Anguiscola came from a family of five painter-sisters and Rosalba’s sisters Angela and Nanetta both became known in the arts.Berthe Morisot had two sisters, Edma and Yves, and all three showed such remarkable talent as children that their parents were obliged to let them study art. Yves married young and gave up. In 1863 Edma and Berthe went to the studio of the famous landscape painter Corot, who expressed a preference for Edma’s work. They continued to work together for six years until, in I869, Edma married and gave up, confining herself to producing copies of her sister’s work. Berthe must have been very determined to continue her work, despite her own marriage in 1874, and her career is remarkable in the light of Victorian attitudes to women, marriage and the pursuit of art. Morisot was up against ideas such as these expressed by Bettina van Hutten, even as late as 1910: ‘So long as a woman refrains from unsexing herself by acquiring genius, let her dabble in anything. The woman of genius not only does not exist but when she does, she is a MAN.’...I had not expected to find that so many of these women had had artistically active sisters, but I was even more surprised to find that there were many more women artists in the circles around them. The painting in the Gallery by Rosa Bonheur, The Horse Fair, was painted in part by her friend and life-long companion, Nathalie Micas. She was a pupil of Bonheur’s but exhibited paintings in her own right. No writer on this fact has commented on the significance of another woman who could paint these large animal paintings well enough to pass for a work by Rosa Bonheur.One of the many copies that we know of the Vigee-Lebrun Self Portrait in the National Gallery (itself a copy by the artist of her own originally is by an otherwise unknown Madame Tupier-Lefranc, a painting which is now in the museum at Versailles. Very little is known about this painter, but probably she was a pupil of Vigee-Lebrun since the artist is known to have had many women pupils. Rosalba’s leading rival in portraiture was a Florentine woman artist. Two of her best known pupils were Margherita Terzi and Angioletta Sartori, and the latter was a sister of another famous woman artist of the period, Felicita Sartori. There must have existed a lively women’s culture which was more or less taken for granted by their contemporaries. There have been good, mediocre and bad women artists and not just solitary figures who rise out of nowhere by magical processes which defy all the social and educational obstacles that we know existed. We don’t have to prove that all women artists of the past were great, but we need to know that they were more numerous than we are led to believe if we are to explode the individualistic-genius-will-win-through-myth that abounds today in art history. Moreover I am tempted to see in these family workshops and women’s studios a network of support and encouragement which would counter the discrimination they received as women.       The women’s studio at the Academy Julian       Marie Bashkirtseff, SR.34, April 1975 ... Bonheur painted The Horse Fair in 1855 as a small replica of a very successful and very large painting which is now in New York. She had worked directly from the horses in the Paris horse market. In order to do this to peace she applied to the police for special permission to wear men’s clothing while she worked.... The Horse Fair went to England where it travelled round the country being exhibited to large crowds. Even Queen Victoria had it brought to Buckingham Palace so that she too could see this famous work. Bonheur and Micas painted a replica one quarter the original size to assist the engraver and it is this version that had the single honour of being the first work by a living artist to enter the National Gallery.The Self Portrait by Elizabeth Vigee-Lebrun was painted in 1782 in Brussels after she had seen the famous painting by Rubens, The Straw Hat. Her own painting is an echo of the Rubens and a compliment to it, yet it is very different. In the Rubens, the female who wears the hat of the title is coquettish and painted with all the love of luscious female flesh for which Rubens is renowned. The style of the Vigee-Lebrun owes a lot to Rubens in rich colours and free brushwork. But the woman who looks out at you with a clear gaze is not a pretty passive mannequin for a milliner. In her hands she holds the proof of her activity, her palette and brushes, the tools with which she has just created the image you are now contemplating. Still, it is not a characterful portrait, and it does not convey the dynamic quality of activity. The explanation is in part that women artists are constrained by traditional representations of women in art. Women are rarely the active protagonists of a painting; they are all too often the beautiful objects presented to the spectator for HIS enjoyment. So, when a woman comes to paint herself as a maker of pictures, her active role comes into conflict with the stereotyped images of women which she sees, all around her in the history of her art. This portrait shows Vigee-Lebrun surveying herself as women have always been surveyed in art, rather than analysing her own image in terms of personality, individuality or energy. It is a nice painting with many appealing qualities but I feel that it lacks conviction because of the internal contradiction she experienced as a woman making an image of a woman in a language that has been made by men for men.This problem did not prevent many of the women I have mentioned from being very successful. Rosalba had a brilliant career, courted by royalty, honoured by the Academy of Clementina at Bologna in 1720 and acclaimed in Italy, Germany, France and England. She was a member of the guild of St Luke at Rome which was the exclusive, professional body of artists. Judith Leyster was a member of the same guild in Haarlem in 1633 and by 1635 had three pupils of her own. Hemessen and Anguiscola went to the Spanish court under royal patronage and the latter was given a splendid dowry on her marriage by Philip II as a mark of his respect. Vigee-Lebrun was a member of the prestigious Academic Royale in France. This body had allowed women in (on a quota system) since its foundation in the seventeenth century, but when it was reconstituted after temporary suspension during the French Revolution, its doors were closed to women.There was a marked trend towards more overt prejudice and disparagement of women in the nineteenth century. More and more critics are at pains to point out the sex and sexually-determined characteristics of an artist and her work. Morisot exhibited the National Gallery painting A Summer Day in the Impressionist Group Exhibition in 1880 where she met with this comment: ‘Mesdames Morisot, Cassatt and Bracquemond represent feminine impressionism.’ A later critic, James Laver, also delights to use this dismissive adjective: ‘The lighter palette of the impressionists suited her femininity more than the sombre tones of Monet.’ It would be interesting to expand that equation of lightness of palette with femininity and talk about the effeminacy of other impressionists, of Monet, or of Renoir who claimed that he painted with his prick.... The purpose of this survey is emphatically not merely to prove that there are women artists in the past. Although their existence is important for our history as women, the Old Mistresses are interesting for what they tell us about art in general; about the conditions necessary to become an artist, to remain at work and to gain recognition and about the ingrained biases against women and when they developed.There may be only nine women artists in the National Gallery, but it should be enough to make everyone take a new look at the collection and the values on which its exhibition policy is based.Although I take responsibility for the views chat are expressed in the text I would like to acknowledge the group discussions with Rosie, Pat, Tina, Amanda, Alene and Annie.SR.21, March 1974 
American Women’s Conceptual Art Exhibition, LondonREVIEWED BY ROZSIKA PARKER... ‘Why have an all-women show?’ Lucy Lippard suggests the reason why: ‘All art no matter how “rational" comes from inside the artist and the social and biological experience of any woman is very different from that of any man in this society. Art of course has no sex. But artists do.’...SR.25, July 1974
Dedicated to the Unknown ArtistSUSAN HILLER INTERVIEWED BY ROZSIKA PARKERFeminist artists are working in any number of ways from up-from poster are, to thoroughly researched documentary exhibitions, to avant-garde art practice which is where Susan Hiller’s work belongs. She was trained as an anthropologist but in the mid 1960s began working as an artist. She pursues her initial fascination for objects like seaside postcards, fragments of Pueblo Indian women’s pottery, photos from automatic machines, analyses them and classifies them. She wants to bring out the cultural meanings hidden within the images, to raise questions about ways of seeing and ordering experience in a patriarchal society.During April three exhibitions of your work opened in relatively conventional galleries, yet you are highly critical of the ‘Art World’ structure.I would say that my using the gallery context at the moment is strategic. I am trying to insert a kind of world view smack into the middle of patriarchal notions of what art is. When I was younger I experienced real difficulty in placing my work within this very hostile structure, but at a certain point you have to face up to the necessities. If you want to communicate you are impelled to insert your work into the art of your time. I think you have a responsibility towards your work, and it’s a heavy burden to have it sitting around unseen by everyone but a few friends. Once you’ve been working for a fair period, once you feel fairly confident about your work, you have to make a decision about what to do with it. The decision to place your work within the contemporary art context causes incredible stress. I don’t know any women artists who are not stressed.I can understand that putting your work up for public judgement would be stressfully but why is it particularly acute for women?Well, your work won’t be seen properly, it won’t be seen clearly. And no matter how much validation I receive from the mainstream, I can on see my presence within it as intrusive. And the difficulties that I get into are, I believe, the difficulties of communication and language based on a totally different perception of the world.I’d agree that the way people see your work is indelibly coloured by the fact you are a woman, but how does your experience as a woman- your perception of the world- affect your relationship to the male art establishment?Take for example the arts grant-aiding committee that you and I served on. It had initially been all male but gradually over the years more and more women were invited to serve as members. As soon as there were several women on that panel the language of discussion changed from being the formal and strategic language of the committee room to being a language of feeling and a language of confrontation. Rows broke out that had formerly seethed unmentioned, and those rows were about absolutely basic issues concerning the whole problem of grant-aiding the arts. But they had not been made explicit in all those years of funding the arts in this country. Who made them explicit? The women on the panel.Don’t you think that happened because we were already politicized rather than because we were women?No. Look, recently there’s been a lot of trouble because there are not enough women teaching in art colleges and the students are finally getting to the point where they are demanding that more women be hired. In a staff meeting at the college where I teach I said that this request of the students should be listened to, I think it’s important because I respect the students, not just because that specific demand might be in my interest. A male member of the staff stood up after me and said he totally agreed with everything I said, he thought we should have at least 50 per cent women teaching at the college and ended up by saying, ‘Of course that would mean the end of art education as we know it.’ He’s absolutely right (laughter).But surely a lot of are administrators, people running galleries and so on, are women and they change nothing.Because administrators who are not feminists are often people who fit themselves into the male structure. They can therefore only give credibility to the existing value system.... When I was talking at Cambridge about the work I showed there, the only hostile member of the discussion was a woman art historian whose speciality was the Renaissance. She attacked me because she said I was calling into doubt ideas about art that she held dear. I was saying that soup ladles were as important as Rembrandts and she didn’t think soup ladles were as important as Rembrandts. I replied that in terms of personal meanings to her Rembrandt’s work might be more important than soup ladles, but to terms of telling us things about ourselves, soup ladles were just as important. Then she did a sudden about-face, he looked as though she was going to cry. I could see some sort of pressure building up inside and she started to mumble. The mumbling, all the inarticulate stuff, was what she really thought. Suddenly she said, ‘You’re absolutely right, soup ladle are important,’ and dashed out of the room. I never saw her again. One of the reasons she was able to initially articulate was that she was dealing with the accepted frameworks and categories. It’s when we try to deal with the contradictions arising from our experience within these frameworks that we have no language.So one of the reasons why I think some women arts administrators-who aren’t feminists - are hostile to women artists without recognizing their own hostility is that they resent the fact that there are at least a few women around who are attempting to speak and to create a language to which they feel at home.How does your work challenge conventional ways of seeing reality?In the three shows on in April, the components of the works are cultural artifacts... postcards, fragments of pottery, photographs from automatic machines and clippings from popular encyclopaedias. Now conventional art materials (canvas, paint) are mute, it’s only when work is put into them in terms of presentation and analysis that they say anything. So by extension what I’m trying to do to my recent work is to make articulate that which is inarticulate. I’m interested in these cultural materials for the unspoken assumptions they convey. ... When I wrote about one of the pieces I said that to examine the givens of a culture implies to some extent that you are separated from it. Now I didn’t say that I am separated from the language of my culture because I am a woman. I don’t want to make those kind of statements, I want the art to speak. I don’t want to label it - here is the work of a feminist artist. That notion has been very much degraded; to call people feminist artists is to box them off into an area which cannot insert itself, cannot contradict mainstream notions of art. Feminists are shunted off to a little side-track called ‘Feminist Art’.And it’s characterized as being utterly unconcerned with notions of what art is and only concerned with making strong, direct statements about the position of women in our culture.... Let’s talk about your piece called Dedicated to the Unknown Artist in which you collected and presented hundreds of seaside postcards, all titled Rough Sea...My conviction is that popular formats may well be art. A postcard is after all a miniature picture. In some of the postcards where the original image is photographic, hand tinting has been added. We tend to think of this sort of thing as a mechanical process, but by comparing several examples based on one initial image, it is easy to see that each painter painted the image completely differently. Aspects of imagination, fantasy or whatever enter the process inevitably. Human beings are not machines; they express their creativity in their gestures, in their ordinary, mundane working gestures. And it’s those sort of things I am trying to bring out in that piece.You no longer work collectively but always make it clear how your work depends on other people’s, whether it is the postcard artists or the Pueblo Indian women potters whose shards you work with in Fragments. You point out that the Pueblo women say they draw inspiration from their art history, from a tradition of pottery making handed down for over two thousand years from mother to daughter, as well as basing their painted pots on designs that they have dreamed at night. Are you saying our culture makes too rigid a distinction between rational and irrational thought?Yes, our culture more than most makes a distinction between the rational and irrational, between empiricism and intuitive ways of apprehending the world. In my experience those kinds of distinctions don’t have any validity. In my work I’m trying to approach a kind of reconciliation of rational and irrational factors which seems to me a lived truth for many people - particularly for women. For myself, speaking as a woman, I can say that this is part of the way that I see things. It is true that a comparatively large number of women became involved in Surrealism which as an art movement aimed to unite the rational and irrational, conscious and unconscious, and which supported the notion of the artist as medium rather than a domineering, ordering force.It has been argued that the subjugation of women has strengthened certain faculties because in order to survive women had to develop resources to judge the nature of people and situations. Our culture, however, has laid great stress on the development of rational, thinking faculties in people and dismissed or minimized the irrational, calling these qualities feminine, negating them, calling them extra-sensory perception.Except when male artists draw on irrational mode of thought or dreams and then it’s termed inspiration provided by The Muse- the female, silent, representative of the unconscious and the dream.Yet there are numerous instances in the history of science of great insights coming to people in a way that our culture dismisses. In other words when you study the history of science, you study it as a history of empiricism, experimentation and the formulation of hypotheses, but in fact so many important insights of science have come through what are called irrational means that we have to conclude that the way science describes itself is not value free.Now I think that because of the situation of women in our society, they may have a kind of privileged access to those ways of knowledge, and I don’t see them as antithetical to, or less significant than, the more dominant, rational modes.SR.72, July 1978
Portrait of the Artist as HousewifeROZSIKA PARKER‘They had houses, children, lives of habit and habitation. They were trapped in an especially painful way. Their spirits yearning to travel, their bodies committed to men, to children, to houses.’2Feministo, the women’s postal art event, could be described as a lifeline for trapped women. Growing numbers are exchanging small art works through the post.It began in 1975 when Sally Gollop, isolated on the Isle of Wight,and Kate Walker in London started sending each other images which expressed the feelings of women confined by childcare and domestic responsibility. An early work from Sally, for example, rook the form of a miniature kitchen dresser with shelves like bars across the window. Cups obscured the view and with the crockery hung hands and a brain.The two involved their friends and the numbers have slowly increased. Some were inspired to join by shows of the work in England, Scotland and Germany, others heard about it on the radio or answered an invitation in Spare Rib.... The significance of Feministo goes way beyond individual art works. Both the form and content of the art take up many of the criticisms that the women’s movement has levelled at established art practice.It undermines, for example, the idea of the isolated genius (the artist who, whether they wish it or not, intimidates others from producing) by revealing the collective basis of inspiration: ‘images are reiterated in different people’s work, images and ideas aren’t private property.’3 And as each woman can reply directly to the work she receives, the division between art producer and consumer begins to be broken down. Art practice becomes a living process- more of a dialogue.Perhaps because Feministo is like a visual discussion, a long-distance consciousness-raising session, it avoids simplistic polemics. The images are neither idealistic (women are strong, wonderful, invincible nor despairing (women are helpless, hopeless, victims). Instead the work explores the complexity of our relationship to our sexuality, domesticity, motherhood and romanticism. lt’s often witty, irreverent and most subversive when, as in a consciousness-raising group, a number of women contribute to the same theme.The destructive conflict we experience between being a consumer, a commodity and a nurturer is analysed in images of food. A box of Black Magic chocolates opens to reveal fragments of women’s bodies symbolizing the way women are portrayed as ‘something to be enjoyed’, until we too accept our bodies as commodities, seeing ourselves through other people’s eyes and believing that parts of our bodies are desirable and other parts are disaster areas. Another box, filled with smiling, pleasing mouths is titled ‘Keep Smiling Chocs’.Then there’s the plate of salad with a reclining nude - the image of women which most directly conflicts with their activity as artists - lying instead of harm amongst cucumber, lettuce and tomatoes.A golden, appetizing, plaster pie bears the words ‘The Safe Way Humble Pie’, which reading between the pie crust could spell adapt, conform, compromise. The hours consumed by shopping, cooking and feeding are symbolized by strings of knitted zippered sandwiches or a saucepan sawn in half and filled with crocheted cauliflower.Nearly all the pieces manage to convey both the appeal of domesticity and the bitterness and disillusion. This is part of the show’s political strength. Certain images predominate: butterflies impaled or escaping, masks reflecting the shifts of identity daily demanded of women, windows simultaneously forming prison bars and frames for domestic dreams.I think the same ambivalence is reflected in the materials used. There’s nostalgia as well as rebellion in the scraps of cloth, old photographs, packaging and supermarket trays - sterile, depressing yet seductive. The materials also reflect women’s limited resources, and in some cases, a rejection of the ‘complex technology which has become an integral part of the established art scene’. And because much of the work is flimsy it has an impermanence which the women value. Most want to make statements rather than consumer objects.Techniques vary. The show contains a great deal of assemblage, some painting and drawing, but a lot is knitted or sewn. On one level the use of craft validates women’s traditional skills and emphasizes how much pleasure there is in, for example, crocheting. On another level it draws attention to the way our time and energy has been absorbed by our massive contribution to the domestic economy: knitting, sewing and furnishing the home. Because all that work was done for immediate use in the home, not for the cultural market - for love not money - its creativity has been discounted. A pink and blue knitted panel, still hanging from the needles, picks up this theme. It reads ‘Heart Not Art, Homemade I’m Afraid.’If craftwork is valued, it’s out of nostalgia or out of admiration for an individual skill. The symbolic significance craftworks had or have for women is usually overlooked despite the fact that feminist an historians continue to draw attention to the content and social role of craft production. And like the eighteenth-century women who sent each other Friendship Samplers, the women of Feministo exchange stitched messages, only their samplers read ‘Wife is a Four Letter Word’.... By providing audience and feedback, Feministo has given women who have abandoned art the incentive to start again, while women who’ve never seen themselves as artists gain the confidence to try making things.... Not all the women in Feministo wanted to risk showing the work in public, but most believe it is politically important. They are, after	Salad Plate       SR.60, July 1977all, fighting both the art world and sexism by bringing domestic imagery into the open.They try to create a new form of exhibition, showing the context of the work by pinning up the letters the women send to each other with the art works. Their aim is to unite ‘apparently disparate aspects- the private, domestic and personal with political and social understanding’. Exhibiting homemade works begins to challenge the split between the public and domestic spheres, between ‘home and work’, validating women’s work in the home as ‘work’.Visitors pick up on the protest. ‘Miserable bitches,’ commented one man. Bitter and twisted,’ said another. ‘I don’t see what all the fuss is about.’ While North West Arts Association who housed their first show put up a notice reading ‘Unsuitable for Children’. That struck the women as particularly ironic. Most of them work on the kitchen table ‘in between making the tea and doing the ironing’, constantly interrupted by children.... They want to ‘develop a visual language that is accessible to women in that it corresponds to their own experience’... Feministo steers a course between ‘celebrating the area of domestic creativity and “women’s world” and exposing it for its paucity’.With much of the work, the spectator’s response will be invoked by their personal experience, their fantasies and their relationship to the family and sexuality. It can be threatening. ‘You just want to make people as unhappy as yourselves,’ said one woman defensively. It’s hard to predict whether feminist imagery will fill a woman with anger and insecurity, or with instant recognition and relief, but no one can remain unmoved by Portrait of the Artist as Housewife.SR.60, July 1977
The Lost TheatreJULES HOLLEDGEIt was the first performance of a feminist play in the Ease End of London. Arriving early on Thursday evening at Bow Bach Hall, the actresses arranged the few pieces of furniture necessary for the play and then waited. The hall soon filled with local people. The play, An Englishwoman’s Home, set in 1910, opens with Maria, a young working-class woman, hard at work in the kitchen. Her husband, John, enters drunk.John: Britons never, never shall be slaves! (after a pause, cheerily) Well, Maria, ‘ere I ham, you see.Maria: Is females Britons?John. Females? Of course! Wot do you think? Wot’s the good of askin’ such a silly question?Maria: Well, ‘ow was I to know what the arrangement was? And if it comes to that, what is slavery I should like to know?John (pompously): Well, I’ll tell yer. If you was a slave you’d have to work for some man without any wages. Just for your food and lodging, like.Maria: Oh Rule Britannia! Fancy that! ‘E would provide my food and lodging!Maria supports herself, her husband and their child by raking in laundry and renting out a room to a lodger. She is persuaded during the course of the play to go to a suffragette meeting, and in the final scene she demands rile voce and forces John to help her with the housework.The Actresses’ Franchise League performed this play in 1911. They were acting real women rather than the simpering debutantes and stereotyped macrons of the West End stage. The story of chose actresses and their feminist theatre was pieced together by Jules Holledge from old newspaper cuttings, theatre programmes and playscripts. Jane Comfort, who started her career on the stage in 1909 and retired after her last engagement in The Mousetrap just eighteen months ago, helped to write ‘The Lose Theatre’.On 8 December 1908, the Criterion Restaurant, London, was packed with four hundred actresses, actors and dramatists; among them the leading stars of the day, Ellen Terry, Gertrude Forbes Robertson, Decima Moore, Eva Moore and Mrs Kendal. The meeting had been called to form the Actresses’ Franchise League, to campaign for votes for women.It is not surprising that such a large number of artistes were there. That same year nearly a quarter of a million people demonstrated in Hyde Park for women’s enfranchisement, and a Private Member’s Bill giving women the vote had passed its first reading in Parliament before being killed by the government. It is also not surprising that actresses were forming a franchise league. A successful Edwardian actress was a privileged woman; she was free to manage theatres and control her employment and had some control over her sexuality: an actress could marry, divorce and have numerous lovers without ever becoming a social outcast.That first meeting was noted more for its theatricality than its political conflicts. Jane Comfort remembers it and how she came to join: ‘Gertrude Forbes Robertson came to collect my aunt, the dramatist Madeline Lucette Ryley, to take her to the meeting, and I was dragged along because wherever my aunt went in those days I went too. I had just left school and I was studying for the stage. I remember on the way home in the car I was terribly excited about all I had heard, and what a wonderful thing it was, and how I wished I could join the Actresses’ Franchise League. My aunt said, “You’re not eligible to join; you’re not an actress!” But Gertrude, who was always ready to help, said, “Why don’t you come and walk on in The High Bid, at Her Majesty’s Theatre.” And so I went on in one of the crowd scenes for a guinea a week, and provided my own costume. That was my first appearance on the London stage and as soon as I could say I was an actress I joined the Actresses’ Franchise League.’ A Pageant Of Great Women was the first major theatrical event organized by the Actresses’ Franchise League. It was performed at the Scala Theatre, London, on 10 November 1909, barely two months after the first suffragette prisoners had been forcibly fed in Winston Green prison, Birmingham. The main character of the Pageant is ‘Woman’, who demands freedom from ‘Justice’, while ‘Prejudice’, a man, argues against her. ‘Prejudice’s’ objection to ‘Woman’s’ liberation is that her innate stupidity makes her incapable of mature thought. This is how ‘Woman’ answers:Oh well, indeed, well does this come from youWho held the body as all, the spirit as nought. For you who saw us only as a sex!Who praised a simper far above a thoughtWho prized a dimple far above a brain!So we were trained to simper, not to think,So were we bred for dimples not for brains!The language may be unduly formal but the message is clear: if you treat women as sex objects that is what they become. But the Pageant is primarily an excuse to introduce women warriors, artists, scholars, monarchs and saints, who demonstrate the physical, intellectual, creative and ethical strengths of women. Fifty-two well-known actresses were using their skills, probably for the first time in their theatrical careers, to create positive images of women. The Edwardian era had no film stars or professional models so actresses were powerful image makers. They modelled clothes, posed for discreet pin-ups and postcards and from the variety halls to the West End stage provided sex symbols for every class. Often they were mistaken for the sexist stereotypes they were employed to portray. The Pageant gave them the freedom to express on stage their own political viewpoint. Because of its importance to both the performers and audience, Ellen Terry described the Pageant as ‘the first practical piece of political propaganda’.Cicely Hamilton, the author, gave up acting to become a playwright, a profession which offered few opportunities to women. Her literary agent advised her to conceal the sex of the author until after the press notices were out, warning her that plays known to be written by women were apt to get a bad press.The Pageant proved so popular that suffrage societies all over the country performed it. Edy Craig, who directed the first performance, also directed these local productions, and the Actresses’ Franchise League provided the costumes and the leading performers. The Great Women were cast from the local suffragettes which, as Cicely Hamilton explains, often caused problems: ‘The secretary of the local suffrage movement was furnished beforehand with a list of types required for the various parts; this list I should add, was marked “strictly confidential” - as well it might, considering it contained such items as “need not be good looking" and, in the case of one character whose face was all but concealed beneath her head-dress, “any old thing will do”. The extreme popularity of Joan of Arc was on more than one occasion a source of real unpleasantness, when Edy had to deal firmly with some lady of entirely unsuitable appearance who, by sheer determination of the pulling of strings, had got herself cast for the part.’The Pageant was a success, but it required months of preparation, and every day the League was besieged with requests from suffrage societies for short entertainments, to be performed at political meetings. Some of the actresses in the League tried to meet this demand by preparing short monologues and poems. Jane Comfort was one of them: ‘One Friday my dear old uncle was coming home from lunch when a leaflet was thrust into his hand with my name on it, saying I was appearing at the Women’s Social and Political Union meeting at the Queen’s Hall, Upper Regent Street. He was always interested in what I was doing so he toddled along to the meeting and sat at the back of the hall to see what I was up to. Well I recited my little bit, a prologue by Laurence Housman. It began:No cause is great that is not hard to gainNo right so clear as not to be denied.Else in the past no martyrs had been slain,No prophets stoned, no saints by torture tried.It went very well and Christabel Pankhurst who was in the chair passed word along the platform: Did I have an encore; did I know “Woman This And Woman That”? I was horrified because Decima Moore always recited “Woman This And Woman That” and I thought it sacrilege for anyone else to perform it. So I felt very foolish and said, terribly sorry, I didn’t. After the meeting I sneaked out and went home for tea, and as I put my key in the door, I heard my uncle say, “You silly juggins, why didn’t you take a call?” That was the actor speaking, so I said, “How could I take a call? It wasn’t a theatrical performance, it was a political meeting, and anyway Christabel Pankhurst is the star of the thing.”'The suffrage societies soon found that feminist entertainment at a political meeting both doubled audiences and was effective propaganda. The demands made on the League provided a strong incentive to develop feminist theatre, and by the middle of 1909 five plays were ready for performance at meetings throughout the country. The informality of the production and performance acted as a stimulus for more women and men to try their hand at writing for the stage, and between 1909 and 1914 over twenty women had their plays performed by the League. Women’s groups all over the country wrote and performed their own plays. In 1911 the employees of Selfridges got together a musical comedy called The Suffrage Girl, about a general election in a country where women have the vote. The humour of the play lay in the fact that the fare of the candidates was ultimately decided by the heroine’s casting vote. All the plays are in some measure influenced by the contemporary theatre, especially in the representation of working-class characters, who tend to be either desperate suicidal cases or comic drunks. However, these class stereotypes are combated by what can be roughly described as the ‘sisterhood is powerful’ theme: the solidarity of middle- and working-class women in the fight for their rights. In The Woman with a Pack, the middle-class suffragette and the working-class woman fight against sweated labour and prostitution; in An Englishwoman’s Home they fight against the oppression of the wife and mother in the home; and in True Womanhood, the only film the Actresses’ Franchise League made, they fight the poor law system and the workhouse.The appalling conditions of working-class women are time and again used as the dramatic argument in favour of the vote. This is true even to a comic drawing-room piece like Ten Clowning Street. It is set in the Prime Minister’s home, where he is furtively plotting the death and destruction of the suffragettes. His devilish plan is to put a bill through parliament forcing all unmarried women over twenty-one to go out to work. He hopes this will force all the middle-class troublemakers into repressive marriages or occupy them in exhausting work. He is helped by his three daughters, who are anti-suffragists and who have already found work in a shop, a laundry and as a parlour maid to a Labour MP. The scheme is about to be leaked to the press when the three daughters arrive home furious with their father. They have experienced such exploitation that they want the vote to ensure that working women’s conditions are improved. Judith, who has worked in the laundry, is the first to tackle her father:What do you know about women’s work and its conditions? I f you did, you have no business to send me off, as you did, in cold blood to that laundry. You know nothing about it, so you have no business to legislate for it. Why, I know a thousand times more than you know... I’m thankful I’ve had my week’s misery. It’s opened my eyes; taught me what women have to go through when they’re not sheltered behind padded doors like ours.A lot of the preoccupations of the present women’s movement were expressed in these plays. One, called Physical Force, was concerned with self-defence and even featured a Ju Jitsu display.The plays were all short, usually between ten and thirty minutes long, and they were performed in virtually any conditions. The women and men who wrote them were not concerned with abstract concepts of the ‘well-made play’; they were merely using a dramatic form to argue out topical issues. As a discussion about taxation or the position of married women was taken up by the women’s movement, so a play was immediately written, encapsulating the main arguments. In this way the theatre responded to a need and was neither in advance nor lagging behind the movement as a whole.The Women’s Theatre was set up in 1913, as a response to the demand for the League’s work. Its one and only season took place at the Coronet Theatre, London, in December of the same year. They performed two full-length plays in repertoire: A Woman on Her Own by the French playwright Brieux and A Gauntlet by the Scandinavian Bjornsen. A Gauntlet, written in 1870, challenge the notion that a woman must have an irreproachable past in order to be fit for marriage, whereas a man may be totally debauched and suffer no recrimination. A Woman on Her Own is the story of an upper-class girl who tries to maintain her independence, by earning her own living, in a society which offers no opportunity to women outside the home. She fails, and the play ends with her going to Paris either to become a prostitute or to join her former lover as his kept mistress. Brieux, still virtually unknown in England, also wrote a play advocating abortion on demand. The plans for a women’s theatre season in 1914 were curtailed by the outbreak of the First World War, and like so many other activities of the women’s movement, failed to re-emerge in 1919.The Pioneer Players survived until 1920. Established by Edy Craig, they were not a strictly feminist company but were committed to producing progressive theatre. Many of the performers, who worked for the Actresses’ Franchise League and the Women’s Theatre, also worked for the Pioneer Players. Jane Comfort performed in The Daughters of Ishmael, a play about prostitution. A young girl is lured into a brothel, but finds it impossible to live down her past. Jane Comfort remembers how Edy Craig directed the last scene: ‘The girl can’t get a job anywhere, because wherever she goes some man recognizers her; they know where she’s been and she promptly gets the sack. She is literally starving, so she crawls back to the brothel. Edy was so clever with her stage effects. The last scene is the exterior of the brothel. The girl goes up to the door and rings the bell. The madame opens the door and says, “No, you’re no use to me, you’re all in, dearie,” and slams the door in her face. The stage was all dark except for an old-fashioned street high centre stage. At the dress rehearsal Edy noticed Ben Webster, and said to him, “Ben, you’ll be at the performance, won’t you, you’ll be in evening dress; walk across and stop under that lamp and light a cigarette, would you?” That was how she roped people in to do what she wanted in her plays. At the performance Ben was there, beautifully dressed in tails, top hat and everything. He saunters on, stops under the lamp, strikes a match for his cigarette; the girl, who had been sitting on the steps of the brothel, comes up to him and says, “You going home, dearie?”; he blows out the match and passes on.My aunt told me my uncle left in the middle of the play thoroughly sickened, but as she said to me, “Any man would get upset at the sight of a brothel.”’The Actresses’ Franchise League and the Women’s Theatre gradually disappeared during the course of the First World War. The organizational resources of the League were redirected into the British Women’s Hospital and the theatrical skills into Troops Entertainment. By March 1916, the Women’s Theatre Camps Entertainment had performed over three hundred concerts to troops in England and France. Although some of the actresses, like Cicely Hamilton, tried to preserve a feminist perspective in this traditionally sexist form of entertainment, they met with little success. The prevalent attitude was similar to that of Lena Ashwell, the entertainments organizer: ‘When it was impossible to find men, the parties were composed entirely of women. One officer complained at the selection we had made. I was persistent, so finally he asked if I realized that there was not a single member of the company who the men did not long to kiss, and he was petrified with horror when I said that that was just why they were chosen. Even a china teacup, a coloured cloth, a coloured stone, a flower, was a gift to those thousands starved of all beauty, all loveliness.’The actresses were back in their time-worn roles, an image of beauty like a china teacup with sexual overtones. Had they really achieved nothing in the previous ten years? Feminist theatre in 1909 grew out of the demands of the women’s movement and served its needs, crystalized its theories, reflected and challenged them, which is true of the best feminist theatre today. The actresses were not isolated artists with an abstract conception of feminist theatre, they were politically active women, who were swamped by the nationalism of the First World War. They achieved a great deal, but their strengths and weaknesses were those of the movement as a whole.SR.55, February 1977
The Death of Buzz Goodbodyfor Buzz-news items in the paper on 18 April­So the report concludes. these women were	in much distress, did		suffer, and were mostunhappy women		poets too		can documentpeculiar		pain attaching one		warm day in springto heads		that push the earth both ways		statistics pin		you bleeding		up against the wall		men’s eyes, hands, poems freezeyour body bloom in earth		your pain to one exquisitesecond’s consciousness		we will execute your memory thus		as minuet of griefnor weep in family		allowances: you sister youa grief specific; we		your sisters also shareyour haltingstruggle		to be born					(MICHELE ROBERTS)On Saturday 12 April Buzz Goodbody was found dead at her home in Islington. She was twenty-eight. It’s hard to face the fact that the possibilities, the contradictions, the light and shade of the life of a sister like Buzz have now, tragically, finished. One’s left with only a memory to delineate, a handful of dry facts to state. Many know of her talents and her accomplishments as a director with the Royal Shakespeare Company, but it is in a different context I want to speak of Buzz, the context of women’s liberation.She was one of the founder members of the first Women's Street Theatre Group, which was set up in the winter of 1970. She was dedicated, like all of us, to taking women’s political theatre to the places where women were - to demonstrations, streets, shopping centres and markets.Buzz believed in working collectively. Like the rest of us, she acted, made props, tap-danced, wrote leaflets, laughed, suffered and shared her self-doubts in collective script-writing sessions which often turned into consciousness-raising groups. She shared in the heady hours of the Women’s March in 1971, when we burlesqued our way down Oxford Street to the tune of ‘Keep Young and Beautiful’, and per­ formed our first play in Trafalgar Square.Despite her individual success in the theatre world, Buzz was too clear-sighted to think that liberation could be achieved in an individual way, by her own, or any other woman’s success, and so she put her talents and energies into the fight for the liberation of all women.We shall remember her as a revolutionary, and a struggling, all too human sister. (ALISON FELL)Michele Roberts and Alison Fell both belonged to the Women’s Street Theatre Group.SR. 36, June 1975
Anna Wickham and Her PoetryNAOMI LEWIS...Writing poems was, to Anna’s husband, a kind of mental infidelity, which his jealousy could not endure...The gentleman I marriedSays, I ruined his intelligence By marrying him.The gentleman I did not marry Says, I ruined his intelligenceBy not marrying him.I wonder if either of these gentlemenHad an intelligence!I wonder if marriageIs an affair of the intelligence.But now, I will borrow a book from a eunuch.I begin to be interestedIn my own intelligence.‘Jane and a Dilemma’SR.9, March 1973
Positive DiscriminationMICHELENE WANDORIt’s always something of a problem to know how to be constructively critical of work (in the arts) produced by people with whom one is in baste sympathy. As we slowly put together the history of women’s oppression and suppression, we are also in the process of trying to alter the course of that history. From the beginnings of the women’s liberation movement we have urgently demanded of ourselves to make visible what has been suppressed, to encourage each other to produce where we have not produced, and to produce with confidence where we have produced with timidity. It becomes relatively easy for us to encourage each other and to have an initial enthusiasm when we see either an individual woman’s name, or the name of a women’s group attached to       Begonia Tamarit, SR.78, January 1979 work in an area where women have figured relatively little- playwriting and production, for example. ‘It’s great - it’s by a woman.’And yet I think we’re all aware that this is a response which has its own contradictions. The simple fact of production isn’t enough, and neither is a simple supportive attitude which assumes that anything a woman wants to do must simply be encouraged because she is a woman and women are oppressed. In cultural production women have for so long been objects and concepts in a male-dominated view of the world and in the male-dominated cultural industries, that we have to be critical as consumers, as audiences and producers. Critical response is the lifeblood of further production and development - critical response nor passive encouragement.The need to be supportive to each other as women who share the same forms of oppression, which became a tenet of the small consciousness-raising group, has had its own specific backlash. As a result of this, the initial reaching out uncritical support has made it very difficult to be frankly critical, and when women disagree, as indeed we must and do, both individually and politically, it manifests itself in one of two ways. Either it takes the familiar form of behind-the-back gossip, or the sort of violent emotional outbursts and hatreds which many of us have experienced and/or been part of. It is something which I believe is much talked over informally among women, but remains virtually unwritten about. This uneasy ambivalence - trying to maintain a precarious balancing act between support and ‘betrayal’ of sisterhood, generated within feminist ideology - is reflected in women’s liberation writing, and happens continually behind the scenes in a way which is rarely visible....In some respects we’re beginning to move towards serious criticism as the highest form of encouragement, although there is a big gap between theory and practice. All forms of cultural feminist ideology (radical feminist as well as Marxist feminist) reject the notion of woman as supreme isolated artist, writing or painting from a unique subjectivity. We acknowledge the social sources of both our oppression and our inspiration and must therefore also acknowledge our social audiences and the importance of their (our) response.Of course, many of these difficulties apply equally to attempts to evaluate work produced by people whose struggle with and through art forms has so far been primarily defined as ‘socialist’ - though there can’t be many theatre groups left who have not in some way looked at the question of sexism as part of the class struggle. But for all artistic work which challenges the dominant ideology (in this case, anything which doesn’t fit the demands of commercial West End theatre, or safe repertory) there is always the simple problem of survival, since box office alone isn’t enough. Any political theatre group which has been going for any length of time, has managed to do so because of subsidy, however small, and the role of a reviewer or critic can be an invidious one.Any play, book, film, etc. has had weeks and sometimes months or years of work put into it. A review, political or purely aesthetic, can have a disproportionately powerful effect. A ‘bad’ review could knock the art-worker’s livelihood on the head. People can be put off from going to see a play, arts councils may decide not to subsidize it. Some groups actively try and avoid the dangers of depending solely on publicly available reviews or assessments, by the hard and rewarding slog of doing their own publicity and relying on recommendations of people who’ve seen and admire their work. A network of contacts such as this takes a long time to build up, and the disembodied ‘review ‘ still has an important function, both in telling people what is available and in its attempts to evaluate and assess a particular product in relation to others of the same kind, to suggest what is progressive and what is not. It is important to try and do so without setting up competitive standards which effectively suppress anything which doesn’t meet the highest demands, or in a way which serves to demonstrate the superior writing skill of the reviewer as against the reviewed...SR.39, September 1975
Tales I Tell My Mother by Zoe Fairbairns, Sara Maitland, Valerie Miner, Michele Roberts, and Michelene WandorREVIEWED BY KATHERINE  GIEVEThese are short stories by a group of five feminists who worked together in a fiction collective, meeting frequently over a period of eighteen months. A challenge to the traditional picture of the artist alone in a room of her own.The stories, each of which has a single author, are loosely gathered into three sections: feminists confronting the outside world; experience and conflict within the movement; and a world transformed by feminism. There is an introduction to each part crystallizing the discussion within the group and explaining their ideas to us, and particularly why they see fiction as an important part of their work to the women’s movement. To this extent the book is vigorous and exciting: the questions in their minds when they write become questions for us to answer as we read.The force of the collection is an attempt to reclaim fiction and try to make it our own, to use it to explore our consciousness, give an account of our experience, to discuss and to convince. In doing this they are prepared to make explicit the political content of art.Art and the artist have been mystified, reified and isolated in our society. We are trying to talk about method and process and collectivity. If this fact and our open didacticism make it more difficult for you to read these stones as ‘art’ in any traditional ivory tower sense, so much the better.My problem is that the stories are made more difficult to read for these reasons. I don’t deny that art is political; but it seems that where fiction is dominated by ideas and where characters appear as protagonists in an intellectual argument the power of fiction (as against other literary forms) to move and to transform the imagination and perceptions can be lost. For all that, I did like some of the stories a great deal and for them and for the discussion, this is worth reading.SR. 81, April 1979
Liverpool Worker Writers: War of WordsOLIVE, MARIA AND HELEN, ALL OF WHOM BELONG TO WRITERS’ WORKSHOPS, TALK TO EILEEN FAIRWEATHER...Olive: But Second Chance, generally... it’s a lifeline for the working class.Maria: You don’t need any confidence to go on it, and no one’s filling you up with anything - you teach each other.Maria: That’s why it’s marvellous to go along to a writers’ workshop. Maybe we’re not very professional, to that we don’t criticize much, but just to be able to get people’s ideas our of them is enough.Olive: Because we’re all capable of purring words on paper – I don’t care how simple they are or involved. You don’t have to appeal to somebody ‘up there’ - you’ve got your own worth. The ArtsCouncil say that our work isn’t art, just an ‘interesting social exercise’. We don’t care if we’re not artists - we’re craftsmen in our own right.Helen: When we were at school we were bored to tears by ‘accepted’ poetry books. But now if one of the men or girls is writing, it’s in a language I understand, and I can say yes, I identify with that...SR.88, November 1979
ClapperclawREVIEWED BY JILL NICHOLLSClapperclaw are entertainers. A four-woman band, they sing and they take the piss. They’re at their best doing feminist satire: singing very solemnly ‘Grandperson’s Advice to the Boys’, an old Temperance Song (‘Everywhere experience shows It pays to be a man’); sending up a very serious number from the 1942 Rochdale and Pioneer Songbook ­ ‘The Girl with a Spanner in the Pocket of her Pants’; taking off Ronny and the Ronnettes - ‘I got me a helluva fella - He’s got a jaw like a cliff -and he’s seven foot tall - the woman they just fall for him- but he went and ditched them all - when he saw my face.’ They play on women’s supposed bitchiness - ‘If I catch any of yous gals- hanging around I’m gonna -get me my big machine gun and - mow you all down’ - but make a huge joke of it as they sidekick, simper and smirk. When I saw them at a left-wing benefit, women in the audience were surer what the joke was, laughing themselves silly; the men looked a little ill at case. And like all satire, it can be misunderstood; their spoof sexiness has been taken straight.To ‘clapperclaw’ means to revile, to scratch and bite, noisily. The noise comes from all kinds of acoustic instruments - clarinet, guitar, kazoo. They scratch at men, at Maggie Thatcher, the dole queue, the jubilee. They do squatting songs- gleefully acting policemen- a few straight socialist songs and some lyrical folk like ‘The Ant and the Grasshopper’. ‘We need the softer ones too,’ say Caroline John, ‘or it would be just too raucous. But we’re not very good yet at the patter in between. It’s necessary  because  the songs are so different.’They started last September when one of them put an ad in Time Out for ‘competent musicians to sing socialist songs’. Only two women answered. This June Caroline joined. Though it was coincidental at first that they were all women, she says it’s grown on them now. ‘It wasn’t a policy decision but it feels right. Men tend to be more strident, harder. We don’t want to lecture people.’SR. 65, December 1977
Terri QuayeINTERVIEWED BY MARION FUDGERI wasn’t born in Africa, I was born here, my father’s family are from Accra, Ghana, that’s where you get the name Quaye, it’s from the Gha tribe. I went there for the first time in about 1970 and they know I sing and play congas, so it was an incredible thing when I went back, ‘cos it was like one of their daughters coming home.A couple of days after I arrived I experienced one of the most frightening things in my life as a musician. A bandleader friend of ours was holding a dance in a big hotel, and he asked if I’d play. So at one point to the evening, they put two conga drums in the middle of the floor and Jerry stopped everything and addressed the crowd in Gha. He was saying ‘one of our daughters Naakoshie [my Ghanian name] has come back tonight’ and you could tell that people were thinking ‘OK so she’s here but what are those drums doing there?’ I was announced and the family were very proud, I counted the musicians into a prearranged number and we roared off. Suddenly the whole crowd went silent and when a few hundred people stop talking, that kind of silence is quite frightening. Nobody was smiling and I thought ‘maybe I’ve done something very wrong’ and suddenly one woman got up and started coming at me and about six other women followed her and were running towards me, it was quite a distance. I was in a worried sweat, but kept on playing ‘cos I didn’t know what else to do and just before they reached me, they burst into smiles and said, ‘Play sister play!’ The custom there is that if you’re really knocked out with somebody, you stick money on their head and I was showered with all this money. As they did that, the crowd roared and I knew it was all right, but for a minute I didn’t know what was happening, God was I frightened!Yeah, I had a good time there. Down town in the poorer sections, people would bring out drums and we’d sit in back gardens or the gutter and we’d just play together in the streets. That was really nice.Shortly after that, I did a broadcast on Ghana radio which culminated in a weekly broadcast with Ghanian musicians. Women play an important part in music over there, usually as dancers and in some Ghanian tribes as drummers. Music is really the world’s ambassador, you can do a lot of things with music, where talking would fail, you can bring more people together with music than with any words.My whole family is in music, it goes back to my great grandfather, who was a church musician, then my grandfather who was the first jazz pianist to come out of Ghana and then my father who was the top jazz singer in this country for many years. Caleb my brother is a musician, my sister plays guitar, my father’s mother was a dancer and my mother was a singer. So it was presumed that I would be in music by the way I related to musicians, though my parents assumed I’d be a singer or pianist. When I chose drums, I wasn’t discouraged but I guess they found it a bit strange, though not as strange as it would have been to an unmusical family. I was always banging on the table tops and things, I felt it was a very natural thing. I think I actually started when I was about eleven or twelve but remember drums were always accessible to me. My father was a bandleader, so when musicians left their instruments behind, I’d have a go. They’d rehearse at home, or I’d go wherever they were, I was what you’d call the band boy, I’d clean their instruments for them and carry the music.There’s a lot of difference between bongo playing, conga playing and playing a drum kit. I can’t play bongos, though people assume that if you can play one, then you can play the lot. The bongos are a finger instrument, whereas the congas require the whole of the hand, I can’t play a drum kit because I can’t get the co-ordination together - the arms and legs. You don’t need a lot of power from the body to play a drum kit, it’s all in the wrists, but with congas, you need a hell of a lot of strength and also inner strength- a very strong mind.For instance, when I was in New York playing for the dancers (Syvilla Forte’s Afro American Bailet) there was a woman with a withered arm, who would sit in and play some beautiful things on congas. This is the kind of inner strength I’m talking about, it’s the determination that has to come through. Congas aren’t given the respect of a separate instrument but no one can dispute that if you add congas to any kind of music, the very nature of the sound lifts the music and musicians and gives the whole thing impetus and drive.I remember when I was in the show Catch My Soul, I never got to meet any of the women in it because being a drummer I was put in the men’s dressing room! It was funny, one night, Marsha Hunt was coming up on to the top of the set, where I was playing, to do a long speech and when she saw me, she did a double take, it was a complete shock to her that there was a woman playing drums.Here unfortunately, women are expected to play games to boost the male ego and I don’t go along with that. As far as I’m concerned, I’m a drummer and singer, I don’t feel that I have to impress anybody and more than that, I don’t feel that I have to play their sexual games because that’s what it boils down to. I remember when I had my own show in Germany, one night the band got talking about a woman that played vibes and was getting a lot of work. I was interested in this and tried to find out who she was, they told me that she wasn’t that good but she’d bend over and show a lot of cleavage, so she got the bookings. That’s one of the games you’re expected to play to get work. I’ve always fought against this and I always will but I must say that it’s getting better, things are improving. On the other hand, maybe it’s because I’m getting older! Also, you know, if you fight the sexual fight for long enough and you really are determined not to be exploited, then you become a different kind of person, a stronger person and you become looked upon in a different light. I don’t want to say I’m still suffering but I’m still struggling let’s say, people don’t call me ‘one of the boys’ but you become an individual and people respect you for that.Look, I’ll tell you another story, this is a few years ago when I was doing my cabaret stuff which I’ve more or less severed now. Anyway, against my will, I was sent by an agent to do an audition at one of the leading clubs in town. There were quite a few other singers there and when we’d finished, the club owner told me that I could have had the job, but the thing that was wrong with me was that I wasn’t showing any tit (or tits as I wasn’t deformed)! So I told him where he could put his job and he said he’d see to it that I’d never ever work in that club, and that was it. Now, shortly after that, a very beautiful friend of mine was appearing at this club and she invited me down. The time came when she was introduced and the curtains flew open and she was doing the whole thing but the funny thing was, a man sitting in the front row fell asleep.So, is it the public or is it the clubs that demand this exploitation? The nightclubs here have been meat factories for years and are they ever full? Well, they’re not! What keeps them going is their high prices, the escorts they supply and the custom they get from paying off taxi drivers. So let’s face it it’s not the tits that’s pulling them in, is it? I’m saying, things are getting better because you’ll find that these clubs are becoming more and more empty. It’s not what the public want, it’s what they’re having rammed down their throats, the oppression lies with the club owners, promoters and agents and it’s the same in the pop world. Another thing, if those half-empty clubs put music on for music’s sake, they’d double their audience, men and women would come in together, but no woman wants to go to a meat marker. It’s the old school of thinking and it’s dying out because women, whether it’s performers or audiences, don’t want to be subjected to that.When I was working in a club in Beirut, the reason they booked me back was because men were bringing their wives in and one day I even achieved a man bringing in his mother! Now remember we’re talking about Beirut where most of the clubs are ‘girly’ clubs and women are ten steps behind the men. So to begin with, men came, then their wives, then wives would bring in their sisters and women were coming in regularly. Well, you can imagine, the whole place changed, and we’d stay behind and get to meet each other and there was no animosity.       SR.56, March 1977This particular club was where I had to deal with a pianist on the biggest and cruellest ego trip ever, all because he felt I didn’t respect him as a woman should. He’d mess up the control desk, night after night, so that I’d have to stop the show and sort out the distortion and feedback. Then when I learned how to work the control desk myself, he threatened to break both my wrists and even when the management restrained him from doing that, he’d sit in the front row during my show and sing out of tune, just loud enough to put me off. Ooh, it got very heavy! But that’s what I mean about needing strength.If you won’t compromise and become a sex object then you have to become more confident in what you believe and it stretches to your views on other subjects, i.e. politics. You can’t help but combine the two. With Jo’burg Hawk, I sing in two African languages. The base of the group are Black South Africans, I’m part African, part West Indian, and as we’ve all experienced racism our material is obviously politically biased.I believe that the music that you play (you can’t do it all the time obviously) should reflect yourself and that’s the barrier between the pop world and the other forms of music- reggae, jazz, blues and so on. The pop world doesn’t reflect the person. Even the way I play drums reflects me completely, your music is everything that you are and the most important thing is to relate to people as people.Music is my living and I’ll keep on travelling because I draw things from new places. But the most important thing of all is that I have complete control over what I do, I insist on it. Maybe you would have heard of me if I’d put my life into someone else’s hands, maybe you’d have my records at home. But most probably that person would be a man and no matter how kind or considerate he might be, he would still have been brought up as a man and it wouldn’t work. His values would be different to mine, his expectations and his sensitivity would be different to mine so he’d be thinking what a woman should be - which is not the same as what a woman is.I’ve been working for a hell of a lot of years and I’m still here, I’m still playing and I’m still my own person. I’m really pleased to be around at this time because I can see the improvement, not just here but all over the world, it’s changing every day, women are getting stronger and this is great. It just takes rime and also for women who are to the position to - to set a good example, a strong example. When women can fight and men can cry, then we’ll be getting somewhere. There, that’s ending on an optimistic note.SR.26, August 1974
Love Music/ Hate SexismLUCY TOOTHPASTEPopular music in the sixties often expressed protest and rebellion - against parental authority, an outdated sexual morality, the war in Vietnam, and so on. But the whole thing seemed to curdle in the early seventies: a great gap yawned between the rock stars - wallowing in their fabulous wealth - and their fans, who were actually growing poorer, in the grip of the economic recession and the sudden rise in unemployment. It seemed like a terrible, cynical triumph for the status quo, the system’s uncanny ability to absorb any threat and turn it somehow to its own advantage. This disaster seemed to bear out the argument that because rock music is dependent for its existence on the multinational business corporations, it is reactionary by definition and can never successfully challenge oppression. Both musicians and their audiences are exploited financially, and at the same time, the lyrics, full of fantasies and stereotypes of true love, chic rebellion, etc., effectively keep people’s brains in chains.Feminists in particular have objected to rock, which has always been even more male-dominated than other kinds of popular music. The macho posturing and misogynist lyrics of the cock rock bands from the Stones to the Stranglers are notorious. Women artistes have been tolerated as singers, but jeered at as instrumentalists, and the patronizing way women musicians are treated in the rock world must deter all but the toughest (or perhaps the most thick-skinned )... All women who make records are under constant pressure from the record companies to agree to sexist advertising campaigns, and the music press reeks of what has now become a very self-conscious (as if that excused it) sexism.... In the circumstances it’s hardly surprising that many feminist musicians reject rock music, preferring to play jazz or funk or folk or other less macho forms, and also reject the whole commercial music scene, preferring instead to play on the pure but restricted feminist women-only-event circuit, and record on independent labels.And yet, there are those of us who still love rock music and believe it does still have an energy and an enthusiasm and an ability to move people which is potentially subversive. Two campaigns have come into existence based on this belief, namely Rock Against Racism, and the newly-formed Rock Against Sexism.Rock Against Racism was formed in 1976 at the end of a hot and hysterical summer. Unemployment had risen to one and a half million, and we were just beginning to feel the effects of the first big public spending cuts. The press chose to divert attention from this by creating the ‘Scandal of the Four-Star Asians’ (homeless people temporarily housed in a hotel) and by making a hero out of Robert Relf with his famous house ‘For Sale to an English Family Only. ‘Within a few weeks three Asians had died in brutal attacks. Enoch Powell made a speech about ‘alien wedges’, and Eric Clapton said he agreed that repatriation of immigrants was a good idea. R A R was started by music fans who were indignant that white rock stars, of all people, who owe so much in their music to the influence of Black musicians, could suggest that Black people have no right to live amongst them.The formation of R A R coincided with a national revival of live music caused by the emergence of punk bands - with their philosophy of demystifying rock music - and homegrown reggae bands. ‘Rock Against Racism' didn’t have to be just a slogan, because the bands themselves were writing songs about racism and oppression and boredom and, in the case of bands like X-Ray Spex and T R B, sexism too.... A bunch of intrepid musicians and assorted optimists have been meeting in London since November to get Rock Against Sexism off the ground. The aims are: 1) to fight sexism in rock music, and to use rock music to fight sexism in the world at large, 2) to challenge the stereotype images of women and men and promote a more positive image of women in rock, 3) to attack the exploitation of women in advertising, in the press and on the stage, 4) to encourage women musicians by giving them more opportunities to play, and 5) to assert the right of everyone to determine their own sexuality. Rock Against Sexism intends to book name bands as well as unknown ones, trying to draw in a mixed audience of feminists and people as yet unacquainted with feminist ideas... Rock music is such an influential area of popular youth culture that it can’t simply be ignored by feminists. What’s more, for those of us who actually do love the music, it’s worth fighting for the right to express our own experience, our own hopes and struggles in rock.SR.81, April 1979
Gynaecocratia: 8 January, Midwife’s Day, GreeceMERIEL SKINNER... On 8 January this year, I went to Monoklissia, a village near the town of Serres near Thessalonica, in Macedonia, for the Gynaecocratia events.Out of Serres, we’re approaching Monoklissia. All around there are flat, ploughed fields and tall, thin, bare trees marking the ditches between the fields. White overcast sky. We could be in Essex on a winter day.I am with four tourists who I met by chance at the bus station. There was no bus, so we shared a taxi.We are three women and two men. We leave the taxi outside the village, deciding to walk in to see what the reception for the men will be like. We round the bend and are confronted by a lever-barrier right across the road. G Y N A E C O C R A T I A - rule by women - is written on a banner suspended from the barrier pole. Five women in Macedonian costume stand in front of the barrier, defending the entrance to the village. They are full of good humour and we are greeted, ‘Welcome! Many years!’The five are having a great time, singing, dancing and laughing, and spirits are high - though the frost has not long disappeared and it is very chilly standing around in the cold January countryside.There is a bucket of water at the ready and a pine-frond for splashing the water with. These are the weapons for either ‘blessing’ you with a light sprinkling of water on the head, or for flinging water at you more energetically, depending on your sex.A van approaches and has to pull up. The windows must be opened and all the men inside are liberally splashed with water. They must pay a fine before the women let the barrier up to allow the van through to the village. A great deal of horseplay goes on amid gales of laughter. The men show a good sense of humour. They knew what they were letting themselves in for when they came here today.Every car, van, bicycle and lorry is processed like this, and then a coach draws up. There are women and men in this coach which has come from a village anything up to forty miles away for the day’s fun. Karitsa, one of the older women and a key figure to the celebrations, gets on the coach to sort them all out. She takes the microphone and welcomes everyone, and delivers a string of dirty stories, rhymes and riddles. Everyone is laughing by now. One of her stories is about a priest (Roman Catholic not Greek Orthodox) ‘who blessed everyone: normally, of course, it’s done like this... but he did it with something else- well, you all know what it is, and if you don’t, you should, so here you are.’ At this point, she whips out a plastic doll monk in a brown habit, holds it up to the audience, presses the head and from under the habit out springs an enormously long plastic penis. Everyone is thoroughly enjoying all this. When it is over the coach is allowed through to the village.At 11 a.m. we go into the village. The main street is wide but not tarmacked. The church is on the left and the town hall and police station are on the right. An area of the road about sixty yards by twenty is cordoned off. This is the village square for the day, and only women and girls are allowed in it. Except for the three-man musical band, men are not allowed in the enclosure under any pretext whatsoever. Dancing and merrymaking go on to the enclosure, while the men look on from behind the cordon. Whole sections of the male part of the crowd move back with a roar, like a wave, following the path of the sprays of water from the pine-frond, and any individual man who enters the area is swiftly attacked with bucketfuls of water.In the square there are about thirty women of all ages in local costume and many other women from this village or visiting for the day. They are all dancing to the Macedonian clarinet, accordian and drum music, and the atmosphere is really festive and friendly.One of today’s characters is a woman in local costume, with a policeman’s sash, belt, purse and cap, and a whistle which she frequently uses to instil order in the crowd. Another woman arrives wearing local costume, and carrying a gun and a rabbit, a dog following at her heels. The hunter saunters along smoking a cigarette. In the countryside the notion of a Greek woman smoking a cigarette is completely unthinkable, and for a countrywoman to do so in public borders on science fiction. (Nevertheless, although hunting is completely a male pastime, the ancient god of hunting was not a god. She was a goddess- Diana, or Artemis.)At midday we all dance and walk around the village, calling in at the houses of two of the oldest women of the village. Perhaps they were the midwives before the law was enforced that only qualified doctors and nurses were allowed to do this work. The first woman is between ninety and a hundred years old - she is not sure exactly - and she is delighted by the crowd of a hundred or so of us who have come to give her festive greetings, many people kissing her hand as they do so. It is the same scene when we stop at the house of the second old woman, who is aged about sixty, and perhaps the next midwife in the village after the older one.An hour later, we are back at the centre, and while some dancing goes on, most people crowd into the town hall which has been completely taken over for the day, and where a lunch of chicken soup, rice and vegetables is laid on.‘We weren’t expecting this number. Last year we had two coaches. This year there are six or seven.’ But everyone is fed, and everyone has a good time.Dancing, talking, laughing, eating and keeping the men wetly in order go on all the time until things are in full swing again after lunch. All through the afternoon, we dance in the square. We dance in a long line, arms on each other’s shoulders, a Macedonian dance in labyrinth fashion, spiralling into and out from the centre. Or we dance in circles of about six. Or we dance in completely unstructured groupings. Sometimes only the women in local costume dance, and when they take over, from time to time there is a lot of clowning around, the leader puffing ostentatiously on a cigarette or drooping a cigarette from her mouth as she dances around.In the afternoon there are a lot of attacks on the men who get too near the enclosure, or who get pushed into it by their mates. They have to run the gauntlet having buckets of water flung at them or being pounced on from all sides by all available hands. They rush, stumbling, for the nearest exit, speeding like greased lightning as soon as they can get free and helpless with laughter.At four o’clock, precisely, the chief of the nome (local area) ventures into the enclosure and, after a gentle water blessing, he join the dance for one lap, being led by one of the women. (Normally, when women and men dance the men always lead at the start of the dance and even a whole line of women doing a women’s dance is led by a man.) The chief of the nome does not chance more than one lap of the ring, and then he disappears to the safety of the men’s area.Late in the afternoon the football teams appear. The women who were wearing Macedonian dress are totally transformed, running into the ring in their tracksuits. Although there’s a great deal of laughing and shouting it’s clear that both sides mean business. The dancing shoes are doubling as football boots now, but despite this, the kicking is really effective, and the goalies are ready to save goals in the most flamboyant manner, landing up full-length in the mud whenever necessary. These are Greek village women of forty and fifty. (The teams are made up of women of all ages.) By the time the game is over it’s getting dark, and we adjourn to the town hall. It’s all over for the men now, as they really are excluded from even observing what goes on in the town hall. The curtains are drawn, and the locked doors are open only to women. The three-man band has done fantastically well, playing all day long and throughout the evening, with breaks from time to time. But the prize must go to Karitsa (aged sixty-five) and some of the other women, who keep on the go non-stop from dawn till night, instigating all the fun, horsing around, dancing all day and throwing the water around.There isn’t a way to describe the time we spend dancing. It isn’t just the dancing, it’s the beaming faces, the laughing and the spirit overflowing from all the women here. Each instant is all exhilarating as the first moment, for all of the time that we are together like this. It can’t go on too long, and you don’t realize how long it is going on. Every instant is beautiful.We three tourists (the other two, being men, are sitting it out in the cafe outside) are hauled into the dancing as we were in the afternoon. Though there’s no feeling of competition, good or sexy dancing is appreciated by everyone around and there is a lot of shoulder-and-bust shaking. Some attempt backbends, while shaking their shoulders from side to side, and they are always supported by a helping hand, just in case they go too far. There are two interludes when Karitsa or another woman takes over the microphone to relate a string of dirty stories and the audience roars with laughter. The men in the band are sent out for most of these story sessions. It is a wonderful sight to see the face of an old woman of ninety, in black from head to toe, her face as wrinkled as the hide of an elephant, completely creased up in laughter at these jokes. During the dancing Karitsa especially would poke her backside out, proffering it to anyone sitting by the dance floor who might be interested; and there was no shortage of fingers eager to poke her.At eleven o’clock, the amateur dramatics started. In came - The Moor, a traditional character in Northern Greek folk drama. It was one of the women who had been on the go all day and she was wearing what seemed to be half the entire display of local weaving, which had until then been on show in the front room of the town hall. Her outfit was a red rug which served as a fez, a moustache painted on her face, a shirt and a cotton bedspread pinned to make a pair of pantaloons with the crutch somewhere at mid-calf. After a turn around the floor, she went out and came back leading at the end of a string - The Bear. The Bear shuffled in on all fours. It was small but very bulky, wearing an enormous heavy brown overcoat. It kept its head down, so all you could see was a great bear-like overcoat lumbering around on all fours. It was really effective.The Moor and The Bear paraded around for a while until the excitement had died down a little and then The Bear reared on to its hind legs, to the gasps of the crowd, and somehow starred to become ‘Man’, rearing up at the audience with its arms up, with vaguely threatening, bragging gestures. Then he or it lumbered into the audience and grabbed a victim, flung her on to the floor and leapt on top of her, humping away in a parody of sexual intercourse. There they are, on the floor, falling from full height, without putting out a hand to break the fall, and rolling around on top of each other. They are over sixty, both of them. (The Bear is, of course, Karitsa.)The Bear attempts attacks on other women and finally turns on its master, throwing her also to the ground, and leaping on top of her, full-length. After this has gone on for a while, The Moor (whose turban has fallen off in the melee, and who is therefore now clearly identifiable as one of the women throws The Bear over, and the humping goes on, with the roles reversed. Everything is so chaotic now, that whatever The Bear or its leader do we are helpless with laughter.After this interlude, the band starts up again, and everyone dances. But I am told that these are men’s dances. Women do not do men’s dances. But you wouldn’t have known, everyone obviously knows the dances perfectly well. The proceedings wind up at midnight, with a conga all round the hall while pieces of bread, cheese, egg and chicken are handed round.It has been non-stop action for sixteen hours, and the fun, exhilaration and enthusiasm have not wavered for an instant throughout the day. How they all do it, I really don’t know. I was exhausted by just a few dances. The real athletes of the day were undoubtedly Karitsa - with her broad gold-toothed beam always on her face, a large red flower over her car, and a cigarette usually in her mouth- and a few other women aged forty to sixty; though all ages were involved throughout the day in all the activities...SR.51, October 1976 
8	SEXUALITYIf women are to determine their own lives and change their place in the world, they must first know and accept themselves, including their sexual selves. But the interpretations of women’s sexuality ­ the moral and censorious, the prurient and commercial- make it difficult for women to talk about sexuality or even to find the right words without sounding too technical, crude or romantic. Eleanor Stephens wrote that she was aware that the word ‘intercourse’ described ‘a form of sexual activity defined by men for male orgasm and female reproduction’ (SR.48). And when Nancy Friday asked women about their sexual fantasies, they often replied they didn’t have them, only ‘sexual thoughts’ (SR.43).Fear and repression of women’s sexuality is related to women’s social oppression. The Victorian double standard which is still an undercurrent in our thinking about sexuality maintained that all men had an insistent drive that they had to be allowed to act on. But a wife should be chaste and obedient to the husband. The ‘proper’ wife had sex for the purposes of pregnancy, and the ‘improper’ woman provided sexual services for money. The prostitute was denied dignity and the wife was denied any sexual feeling or self-determination.The more permissive, promiscuous sexuality following the introduction of the contraceptive pill also brought more sexual mystification and pressures for women. Jo Mattison remembered feeling very isolated in her sexual relationship and wrote: ‘I felt I was in a situation where I was expected to behave in an emancipated way but actually felt incapable of doing so’ (SR.29). Anna Koedt’s pamphlet of 1969, The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm, asserted the necessity of clitoral stimulation for women to reach orgasm, and broke with the reproductive view of women’s sexuality which centred women’s pleasure solely in the vagina and dependent on male performance. This was further radicalized by lesbian women, who brought sexuality between women into the foreground after years of concealment and deeply disrupted the heterosexual hold over eroticism. By presenting a positive alternative, it also made sexual autonomy for all women more possible.Along with the Pill and the toleration of sex outside marriage came the commercialization of sex and the use of women’s bodies to sell goods, which separated sex from relationships and turned it into another commodity on the market. Women’s liberation reacted by public demonstrations and protests against beauty contests, pornography and advertising. These brought angry accusations that feminists were humourless and spoiling the fun. The sixties also promoted a new myth of the independent, liberated woman which divorced sex from feeling and encouraged sexual competitiveness. The myth made non-reproductive sex a lonely freedom and idealized young, single women separate from mothers and older women.Women wanted to reclaim their bodies, to define their own desires, to understand their own needs. They are using self-examination to find out more about their own reproductive anatomy. They have discussed sexuality in its context of personal relationships. The discussions have led to questioning the genital focus of eroticism and to the desire for more affectionate sexuality.Sex is part of a wider process of women losing their timidity with themselves and with each other. Women need to feel proud of their sexuality without being totally defined by it or by their reproductive capacity. Jo Mattison wrote that ‘if you can rid yourself of self-hate then you can see the absurdity of denying your sexuality. You want to allow yourself the creativity which you deny to yourself in being self-hating and self-destructive.’Going All the WaySARA RANCE‘Various awful things will happen to you, but never forget, my dear, the men like it.’Fifty years ago, a middle-aged woman gave her betrothed daughter these words of advice on the eve of her wedding; it was probably her first and last piece of sex education. My friend’s mother told her, ‘You must be very careful of men now’, as she handed her her first sanitary towel. No more, no less.Today, in addition to euphemistic warnings from mothers, many children receive some kind of sex education in school. Sadly, however, it continues to reflect a double standard of morality for men and women, and does little to encourage girls to take a more exploratory and active view of their own sexuality. It preserves the view that sex is essentially for reproduction, reinforcing romanticized notions about marriage, and perpetuating antagonisms towards homosexuality and masturbation.Children’s sexual attitudes and knowledge are being patterned from an early age, and are moulded as much by the media, their friends, parents, and other adults, as by what they learn in school. However progressive or conservative the teaching, the ‘facts of life’ are not being written on a blank page: patriarchy has already made its indelible mark. Most girls by the time they are teenagers have learned the ropes of female objectification - spots and fat must be got rid of, periods kept hidden and secret, underarm and leg hair shaved, vaginal smells deodorized. ‘Give your eyes a rest and go around for a day or two without make-up. Try it when your fella’s not around or he’ll get the shock of his life’ (Jackie magazine). How ironical that within the same magazine’s pages anxieties should be created and ‘problems’ answered. And such problem pages often provide the most important and influential source of information for those girls who receive no sex education in their schools.Feminists would like to see sex education taking account of all the many factors which condition our attitudes to our bodies, to sex and reproduction. It should provide an opportunity for children to challenge and question the view of women as sex objects, and the stereotypical roles of wives and mothers. But at present school sex lessons reinforce the assumption that biology is destiny.Sex education in schools crops up in all sorts of guises. It’s hard to generalize about a subject which still isn’t explicitly taught at all in many schools, and doesn’t really exist on any curriculum in its own right. Usually it is incorporated into biology, social studies or religious education. Or it might take the form of an hour-long lecture in a packed assembly hall, given by a marriage guidance counsellor or G P. And what the children are required to study may vary considerably, from the mating habits of Mongolian gerbils to Walt Disney’s (only?) war film, VD Attack Plan. But where the lessons do not just consist of biological facts, about reproduction in the mammal, they become the scene of moral indoctrination. Government reports on education have repeatedly encouraged the conscious use of sex education to inculcate the values of chastity, marriage and family life. The Crowther Report - 15 to 18 (1959) said, ‘To preserve the family in the future a conscious effort is needed by way of the educational system, on a much greater scale than has yet been envisaged.’ And the Newsom Report (1963, on ‘average and below average’ children) suggested that religious instruction should help boys and girls to find a firm base for sexual morality based on chastity before marriage, and fidelity within it, and also suggests that married teachers are best equipped to handle the teaching of sex education.Many Local Education Authorities have produced similar reports. Some issued guidelines to teachers, in response to the media furore about the rape and murder of a little girl by a twelve-year-old boy ­ which the papers implied was the direct result of sex lessons at school. ‘Boy killed after sex lessons’ (Daily Telegraph, 29.9.77). Shropshire LEA, for instance, gave a five-point guideline, the top two being that the family is to be regarded as the fundamental unit of society, and that children are to be taught that intercourse should only take place within marriage (Shropshire Star, 28.9.77). This particular incident provoked a huge response from parents, teachers and official. On phone-ins and on letter pages people questioned the need for sex education at all. ‘Surely sex is natural instinctive behaviour, like eating, and doesn’t require teaching?’ A common fear, and perhaps a more reasonable one, was that it was being taught in an impersonal, clinical manner, without any reference to feelings and relationships. This was distorted and sentimentalized by the press and morality crusaders, who claimed that children must be taught how to love: ‘Storm over “loveless” school sex... sex education which ignores morality and affection’ (Daily Telegraph, 27.9.77). ‘Put love on the syllabus’ (Daily Mail, 28.9.77). ‘The missing lesson was love’ (Evening News, 27.9.77).Extreme opponents of sex education, such as the Responsible Society, argue that it depraves and corrupts. They have recently attacked such respectable organizations as the FPA (who are now also        Lesley Rudainvolved in sex education) because they hold special young people’s clinics. ‘There is a concerted effort by certain organizations to undermine the security of the family.’ A prevalent view is that children who are told about sex will immediately experiment, and that the availability of contraception encourages the young to be promiscuous. In the face of attacks such as these, workers in the field are constantly pushed into defensive positions, and it is hardly surprising that so little progress has been made in the content of sex education materials for children, or in the philosophy underlying them. Even the ‘progressives’ in the field seem constantly at pains to point out their reverence for marriage and the family. The fairly recent introduction of teaching about methods of contraception in a few schools has, like abortion, been justified not from a positive feminist standpoint, a woman’s right to choose, but in terms of population control and prevention of unwanted (read ‘illegitimate’) pregnancy.These, then, are the attitudes which characterize most recent publications, and school radio and TV broadcasts. Sex educators are still restricting the information they give to children to the life cycle, manage and the family, possibly with the mention of V D as cautionary advice against both promiscuity and homosexuality (often the only context in which homosexuality is mentioned). Even the rare advocate of premarital (note the wording) sex holds marriage as the ultimate goal. At a recent conference on ‘accepting adolescent sexuality’, the main speaker, James Hemming, said that premarital sex contributes to a ‘mature capacity for physical love’ which is ‘the basis of happy and enduring marriage and the foundation for loving homes for the next generation to grow up in’. But what about those of us who choose to stay single? Who are gay, or widowed, or divorced? Sex educators still leave children to assume that such people have no legitimate outlet for their sexuality.How pervasive is the view that sex is just for reproduction? It’s surprising how many children even today are still under the impression that their parents have only had sex as many times as there are children in the family. For instance, one sixteen-year-old girl, when asked if she had ever seen or heard her parents making love, replied, ‘I was too young, there’s only me and my brother that are the youngest, all the others are older - so I don’t see how I could’ve.’Because sex education is so limited to this conceptual framework of reproduction, there is no place within it for basic information (let alone discussion) on such topics as masturbation, female arousal and orgasm, or homosexuality. For boys, it is possible that masturbation is explained as having the physiological function of relieving sexual tensions built up by the production of sperm - the common assumption being that male sexuality is somehow irrepressible. Female masturbation is rarely mentioned, confirming the belief that women have no autonomous sexuality, but are capable only of responding to male initiatives - and yet at the same time engendering (irrepressible) sexual desire in the male. This latter continues to be held against them - the seductress Eve being responsible for Adam’s fall. And this ‘original sin’ is still used to absolve male responsibility for rape, and to counsel girls to be modest. Even the latest Department of Education Report (1977) on Health Education says, ‘Girls should also understand that they may inadvertently impose great stresses on boys by arousing sexual reactions in them which they do not fully comprehend and may not be able to control.’The vast majority of sex education books treat ‘sex’ as synonymous with heterosexual intercourse: yes, it is necessary for reproduction, and also conveniently well suited to the sexual gratification of the heterosexual male, but female arousal and orgasm may play no part in this process, and hence can be easily omitted, both in the classroom and in bed. It is staggering how many teenage girls are unaware of the existence of the clitoris, or the possibility of female orgasm. Even a book reprinted in 1977 fails to include the clitoris in its diagram of the female sexual organs (K. Elgin,1977).The stress on sexual intercourse as the be-all and end-all of sex is not only heterosexist, it also misleads many girls into the expectation that penetration will be their primary and ultimate source of physical pleasure. In fact we know that only a minority of women achieve orgasm during intercourse. And yet millions of us continue to feel confused, guilty and inadequate because we find petting, significantly known as foreplay, more physically satisfying than intercourse itself. In addition to the obvious fear of pregnancy, this may explain why many girls are reluctant to ‘go all the way’, and may well be very disappointed when they do so. Meanwhile the male interpretation of this reluctance is ‘prick teasing’.This emphasis on heterosexual intercourse as the valid sexual activity also leads to a striking silence on the subject of homosexuality, or, in cases where it is mentioned, endless cautions and warnings. The DES (Health Education Report, 1977) blatantly encourages sex educators to sweep the subject under the carpet, to deal with it ‘in passing, if and when it arises’, and definitely not to go into it on a deeper level, except for undertaking the essential task of guiding any wayward youngsters back on to the path to the altar. And can you imagine a sex education book which refers to heterosexuality as a phase which will usually pass as you get older? ‘Nobody really knows why heterosexuality develops in some people... It’s a mistake to assume you’re heterosexual on the basis of occasional heterosexual feelings, and it’s a mistake to push yourself towards heterosexuality because of them. Wait until you’re sure, otherwise you could cause yourself a lot of unhappiness and confusion.’ Replace ‘hetero’ with ‘homo’ and you have what Will I Like It?, published in 1978, has to say on the subject. This particular manual may be a slight improvement in that it no longer describes homosexuality as a sickness, but it’s still a far cry from ‘glad to be gay’. Like homosexuality, masturbation is presented not as a valid expression of sexuality in its own right, but as a phase of adolescence, fairly harmless unless it persists into adulthood, when it might begin to inhibit the development of ‘healthy’ and ‘productive’ heterosexual relationships. The DES Health Education Report (1977) refers to it as ‘an inevitable but transient part of sexual awareness’, ‘innocuous’ but ‘infantile’. This is in total harmony with these words of comfort offered in Sex and the Young Teenager (1978):‘A few simple precautions... will help the need pass more quickly.’ ‘A rugged game of tennis or football... will focus your attention elsewhere... helping you to get over the more difficult moments.’Since the so-called ‘sexual revolution’ of the sixties, the do-your­ own-thing approach has occasionally emerged in sex education books. It is a highly questionable approach from the feminist perspective, because although it does acknowledge non-reproductive and extra­ marital sex, it tends to glamorize sexual activity and ignore sexual inequality. In advocating the ‘free expression’ of sexual needs and fantasies, it obscures the fact that most of these are socially constructed and thrive upon the sexual objectification and violation of women. Will I Like It? is such a book. ‘Something else to treat carefully the first time out is the smash-and-grab approach. If both of you feel like raping each other, fine, if not, an over-aggressive rush by either side can lead to an impossibly tense vagina or a lost erection.’ In its eagerness to highlight the pleasures of sex, it becomes glib, misleading and unrealistic. Sex is described as ‘the world’s most popular indoor sport’, and the following statement, too, could only have been written by a privileged male: ‘It’s a physical fact that from the end of puberty to early adulthood you are at your most sexually potent. Orgasms come thick and fast, and you are capable of a level of sexual activity that is exhausting even to think about when you get older.’ Ageist, sexist, inaccurate, and so far removed from the experience of the average teenage girl as to seem quite ludicrous - this is precisely the kind of male attitude which makes women feel despairing and inadequate. Of course it is important that girls discover that their sexuality can be a source of pleasure, but it is unrealistic to expect that this can develop from an understanding of physiology and a grasp of techniques alone. The dependence and passivity which at present characterize female sexuality cannot be separated from women’s general lack of autonomy.So how do we get away from the reproductive view of sex? As a general rule it’s worth trying constantly to make it clear to children that we have a capacity to reproduce, but that’s not necessarily what our bodies are for.It’s all too easy to slide into ‘functionalist’ explanations when describing physiology, especially as we often begin to talk to children about sex in response to the question ‘Where did I come from?’ Another reason is that many girls often receive their first sex education around the time that their periods start, and it’s almost impossible to explain menstruation without reference to reproduction! So bearing this in mind, it’s good to bring out with children from a really early age the many ways in which we can use, or gain pleasure from our bodies: to work, to show affection, to make love, to make babies, so that reproduction is seen as a choice, and not destiny.An ideal learning situation is the small informal group, preferably segregated by sex. No doubt segregation is frowned upon by many teachers and seen as old-fashioned, but it leads to a lot more openness and honesty in discussion. It helps reduce the tendency of girls to feign ignorance or innocence, for fear of otherwise ‘losing their reputations’ and also to reduce the amount of bragging and bravado from boys. Even so, girls are usually reluctant to say anything which might implicate them, and frequently questions will be prefixed by ‘my friend wants to know...’Role-playing games are useful in getting children to explore ideas and different ways of reacting to certain situations. You merely provide me bare bones of the situation and get them to improvise. For instance a conversation between a pregnant girl and her best friend, a boy pressurizing his girlfriend to have sex, a girl discovering her sister is a lesbian, a visit to a family planning clinic. Teachers can gauge from the improvisations how much the children know about, for example, the symptoms of pregnancy, and fill in afterwards during discussion.An idea drawn from experience within the woman’s liberation movement is self-examination: encouraging girls to look at their external sexual anatomy with a mirror, explaining the changes that take place during sexual arousal and orgasm and talking about masturbation. Whereas most boys are used to handling their penis when they pee, for girls looking and touching themselves ‘down there’ is still regarded as ‘dirty’, so they need some encouragement. However, girls and boys need information about female sexual response. The stress on penetration often provokes anxiety in boys about the size of their penis. It’s useful for them to discover that this bears no relation to their ability to satisfy their partner, and that penetration is only one way, not the only way, and that the clitoris is far more sensitive than the vagina. It’s also this penetration-centred view of sex which creates the mystery of ‘what lesbians do in bed’, and the feeling of many girls that masturbation, apart from being ‘dirty’, is a bit of a waste of time. Masturbation is probably one of the best ways that people can learn about their own sexual response, and it contributes to a sense of autonomy to discover that there are many ways of gaining sexual satisfaction. It is a step towards helping people to communicate with their partners, but it should be treated as a valid form of sexual expression in its own right.As far as girls are concerned, it seems to me that a basic aim of good sex education must be to counter the sense of dependency on boys and men, and to move towards a greater physical and emotional autonomy. Of course, it is very hard to break through the prevailing feelings of romanticism (or cynicism) and emerge with a fighting spirit.Despite the well-worn feminist slogan ‘the personal is political’, and the assertion that we must have the right to define our own sexuality, it’s surprising how easily the issue of sexuality gets side-stepped even within the women’s liberation movement. And yet as women our personal identity and public image is tied up almost entirely with sex and reproduction. We learn that our bodies are our bread and butter, we learn that our capacity to reproduce and provide titillation and sexual servicing are our stronger selling points in the marriage market. Marriage and motherhood are still the ‘facts of life’ that all girls are required to learn...SR. 74, October 1978
Don’t Get Too Near the Big ChakraANNE SEVERSON  ‘Gee, I would really like to be in your cunt movie, but mine isn’t quite...?’ Over and over again women who came into the room where I was shooting expressed their anxiety about that most intimate part of their bodies. The ‘invisible ideal’ I began to call it. Everyone thought there was such a thing as a beautiful cunt - but did they have it? No grounds for comparison. No information. Little reinforcement beyond the occasional assurances of a lover or husband.I think I first got the idea of making the movie one day in California when my teenage daughter lounging nude in the sun after a bath, casually exposed herself. I found myself staring at her vagina.‘Mother, for heaven’s sakes!’We both felt a little embarrassed. Later it seemed to me odd that first, I had not looked at that part of her body since she was very small, and secondly, that my curiosity made me uncomfortable. I felt there was something wrong about my interest. I started thinking and realized that I had never seen any woman’s body, that is vagina - with the exception of crotch-shots in pornographic films and magazines or close­ ups in birth films. I asked my women friends if they had ever looked at       Alison Fell, SR.42, December 1975 other women’s cunts. One or two, with bisexual experience, assured me they had, others hadn’t. Few wanted to pursue the matter.... Diane and I were taking a yoga class together and I was intrigued that the first chakra one gains control of, or ‘awakens’ in yogic terms, was located between the vagina and the anus. ‘Chakra’ is Sanscrit for wheels or centres of radiating life force. Joseph Campbell calls them ‘centres of consciousness’. There are seven or eight depending upon the system you follow. The first is located at the base of the spine and is the chakra of pure physical being, survival - it’s the place where you just hang on.The second is the centre in which zeal for life is sexually oriented, the level of consciousness where all psychological energy is erotic. I was jokingly calling it the ‘big chakra’ because we all seemed to be stuck at this level of development. It also seemed to me that the way out of this morass was by transforming some of this energy into a piece of art. In the proposed film I wanted to focus on the same area that our energy was flowing from in the beginning yoga class. I also hoped to creatively release some of this energy for myself and other women in order to move on up the cerebrospinal ladder.But maybe I was still anxious about this new interest. Anyway, enough people told me it was a terrible idea which I should not pursue under any circumstances that I definitely decided to do it. In the back of my mind was the undeniable realization that, at worst, it was sure to be a lucrative potboiler. The people at the Multi-Media Resource Center, then a branch of Glide Methodist Church in San Francisco, agreed to produce and distribute the film and to help me find women willing to be photographed.I designed a flyer with a red rose in the centre, a good symbol for the vagina - spiritual unfolding, feminity, fecundity - inviting women to be in a film about ‘women’s parts’. This phrase seemed evasive but I was still a little uneasy.On the first day of shooting I was even more uneasy. It seemed likely that none would show up. Then in walked one of my oldest friends, unmarried and three months pregnant. She explained she was early because she was lunching with her parents, up from Los Angeles for a visit, and she didn’t want to tell them she was showing her ‘pee pee hole’ in Anne’s movie. With enormous relief I got to the business of shooting.A steady stream of women followed her. Most were friends or students and former-students of mine from the San Francisco Art Institute where I was filming. A few were strangers who had seen the flyer or heard my announcement at a Multi-Media sex education class. By the time the mother of my friend who had been the first to appear walked in, I was feeling quite confident.‘What’s the matter, isn’t my vagina good enough for your film?’ she said. I was so grateful to her for coming that I almost wept. She was solid middle-class and completely respectable. If she wanted to be in the film, there was nothing for me to worry about.The atmosphere of the room where I was working was actually very pleasant. Several women told me later that they had come that day to see what was happening, thinking they would decide whether or not to be in the film on the basis of the feeling they had. I had arranged to have a woman from a class of mine whom I felt had unusually calm and supportive vibes to be there to explain to each arrival exactly what was expected. It worked very well. Women came in nervously, talked to her, then to other women who had already been filmed, and decided to sign up.Everyone wrote down name, address, and birth date. I wanted to know the age range of the women participating and I was also interested in ascertaining if there was a particular astrological spread. At the most banal level of astrological prediction one would expect a high percentage of women with sun in Taurus or Scorpio to appear in a cunt film. Taurus is ruled by the planet Venus, love and beauty. Being an earth sign it is typically sensual, physical, earthy. Scorpio is ruled by Mars, the planet of desire and dynamic energy. It is the sex sign of the zodiac and rules the generative system. As expected, over half of the women in the film had suns in these two signs. Each other sign was represented. The only Gemini was a baby brought in by her Taurus mother.I noticed a few other amusing astrological relationships. A Leo woman - proud, self-confident- came in with her fiance who, before she was filmed, took out his pocket comb and carefully combed her pubic hair. A triple Libra, that is, a woman with both sun and moon in Libra plus Libra rising, she had already been in a number of independent films because of her unusual good looks. She was one of the few women who revealed no anxiety about the beauty of her vagina. She was also the only woman who did not wear underpants, which I interpreted as another mark of self-confidence.A Scorpio woman came in late the first evening with her husband. She had been attending a sex education class which included physical training to develop the muscles of the vaginal barrel and they were both very pleased with the results. She volunteered to demonstrate the movements she had learned for the film. They were remarkable. After filming her I began asking each woman to move and discovered a whole range of personal variations on the basic levator ani contraction.There were four Virgos involved: myself, a prostitute, a lesbian, and 3 psychologist who arrived too late, after I had dismantled the equipment. I find this combination difficult to explain briefly. Suffice it to say that we all deviate from the sexual-social norm in some way. The prostitute, in addition to her choice of profession, is distinguished by having had considerable body work done. She had a nose and chin job some years ago, which she now regrets, later had silicone injections in her breasts, and finally had her vagina surgically altered. The clitoral hood was removed to intensify sensation and the outer labia were trimmed to give the vagina a more youthful appearance and to allow deeper penetration. She feels that the vaginal surgery was a good idea and explained to me that it was necessary for her work. I am tempted to go on writing about her since she has been a kind of female guru for me and a lot of other women and men for some years, but I’ll just recount one anecdote.We first met when I was reaching a women’s class at the Art Institute in the early days of the movement. It was a touchy situation. I had been maligned by the other faculty in my department, all male, for raising an issue that had no relevance to art. On the other hand, my class had been raided by a group of women radicals from Berkeley because it was co-ed and I had a male teaching assistant. I later discovered that it was one of my hostile colleagues who had turned us in.The ‘hooker’, a word she used, had not appeared the week we expected her but we had an exciting session anyway, each of us in the class taking a turn at pretending to be her while the others asked questions. When she arrived the next week I was afraid that we might embarrass or upset her because the questions we had worked up were very personal and direct...The whole cosmos tipped and I saw how a position at the bottom becomes the ultimate strength. During the class meeting she talked about how prostitution cracked and destroyed the egos of a lot of hookers. She also pointed out, and was intensely alive evidence for, the enormous power that comes from doing it the hard way, acting on your impulses, taking the consequences. If you choose to be at the bottom, or find yourself there, ain’t nobody can shove you down. I might point out that she has Venus in Leo in the twelfth house: her love nature in the sign of generosity and expansion, in the house of karma and bondage, of salvation and secret undoing. I, finally, have Jupiter in Aries in the eleventh house, an indication of unusual heroes, heroines.So all together thirty-eight women appeared for the film. The age range was from three months to sixty-three years. There were two Black women, one half-Oriental girl, two lesbians, one prostitute, two virgins (I think), a lot of mothers, three mothers-to-be, three grandmothers, four women menstruating, and one girl who discovered a week later that she had gonorrhea, and one woman who learned a month later that she had uterine cancer. All relevant, I believe, because none of these characteristics is evident in the film - except the women who are menstruating - you can see their Tampax strings.In fact, when the first woman having her period came in to be filmed and casually mentioned that she hoped I didn’t mind, I felt mildly shocked. One more anxiety registered. I realized that I would never consider being in such a film during my period - an old hangover from the fifties when the fact of one’s period was to be concealed or disguised. Teenage Kotex terrors. What if someone could see the outline! I can remember my grandmother on the day after the big event occurred for the first time: ‘Your mother told me about it, dear, I’m so sorry.’ How angry I felt. It was bad enough to have to walk around with a soggy mattress between your legs on the hottest summer day, but why that vile women’s burden attitude?Anyway, these women didn’t seem to suffer from any fears about menstruation being dirty or a source of shame. They climbed up on the table and spread their legs, exposing the vagina, menstrual period, Tampax string and all. One last shudder when I realized that even during times of casual nudity with my most intimate friends I would carefully tuck the little string into the vaginal opening so it wouldn’t be visible.I had just finished writing the preceding paragraph when I opened Robert Graves’s The White Goddess and read the following:The baleful moon-dew used by the witches of Thessaly was apparently a girl’s first menstrual blood, taken during an eclipse of the moon. Pliny devotes a whole chapter of his Natural History to the subject and gives a long list of the powers for good and bad that a menstruating woman possesses. Her touch can blast vines, ivy, and rue, fade purple cloth, blacken linen in the wash-tub, tarnish copper, make bees desert their hives, and cause abortion in mares; but she can also rid a field of pests by walking around it naked before sunrise, calm a storm at sea by exposing her genitals, and cure boils, erysipelas, hydrophobia, and barrenness.Too bad all that mythic power can’t cure the one common female condition that is so vividly evident in the film. The ubiquitous yeast infection. lck. An unattractive, smelly, recurrent nuisance.... I finished editing the film and started showing it. One of the first screenings was for the women who were in it and their guests. Few were able to recognize themselves except for one friend who has bright red pubic hair and the prostitute. She was accompanied by a happy crowd of intimates who whistled and applauded when her cunt appeared on the screen.Another male film-maker, Scott Bartlett, was dissatisfied with the editing and volunteered to do another cut for me. I gave him the colour workprint and waited expectantly to see what he would do. Not surprisingly, Scott eliminated all of the sexually irrelevant or, perhaps I should say, sexually distracting details. He edited our all cunts with Tampax strings, all of those with yeast infections. Each shot was shortened. The result is a lot hotter. Short fast shots of beautiful cunts in glowing technicolor. I just looked at it in my viewer to check these impressions. Objectively, I might even say that he made a better film of the footage. His film is erotic, exciting, sexual. My version is gruelling, even tedious, and as far as I know, no man has ever gotten an erection watching it. But subjectively, I am satisfied by my film and not interested in his.A lot of people have seen the film and gotten angry. Crowds were annoyed at the 1972 Edinburgh Festival, and in a magazine review someone showed me the cunts were compared to ‘rashers of bacon’.When it was shown at the Ann Arbor Film Festival several hundred walked out. One woman was outraged by this response, especially since some of those leaving were making rude and irreverent comments. She chased them up the aisles, bashing with her bag. Later, she explained to me, ‘I would kill for your film’.Another woman walked up to me after a screening in England, and with a very sweet smile, told me she was furious. When I asked why, she explained that her husband had been sitting next to her! I was still perplexed. We took a long walk together. I explained the genesis of my idea and my motivations as well as I could. She explained that she feared that her husband, having been exposed to the horror of the female genitals in such an unequivocal fashion, would never desire her again. We parted sympathetically. I didn’t particularly want Chakra to turn men on, but it would seem too bad if an unhurried non-sexual view of the human vagina turned them off.The most candid response was that of an official of the American Embassy in London where I did a small private screening. We were relaxed after a fine dinner with wine and drinks, and more drinks. He would grin effusively at me and slap my back, ‘You had the balls to do that!... the balls to do that!’Not at all, I thought, not at all.SR.20, February 1974
‘Readers’ Poems’MARGARET S. CHALMERSI have never had a climax.No! I swear!It’s the clitoral truth.SR.39, September 1975       SR.23, May 1974 1 Shoulder to Shoulder, historical serial made for British television about the movement for women’s suffrage.2 How to Save Your Own Life by Erica Jong.3 Spare Rib review by Phil Goodall.------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Work		201Education		224The Arts		261Sexuality		252