PoemOLIVE SCHREINERI saw a woman sleeping. In hersleep she dreamt Life stoodbefore her, and held in eachhand a gift- in the one Love,in the other Freedom. And shesaid to the woman, ‘Choose!’And the woman waited long:and she said, ‘Freedom!’And Life said, ‘Thou hastwell chosen. If thou hadst said,“Love,” I would have giventhee that thou didst ask for;and I would have gone fromthee, and returned to thee nomore. Now, the day will comewhen I shall return. In that dayI shall bear both gifts inone hand.’I heard the woman laugh inher sleep.SR.29, November 1974
LucyINTERVIEWED BY HER DAUGHTER LIZ...When I left school I knew nothing, so I went into the Civil Service. I made the tea for a bit, then I got in as a typist. In those days it was all women. Two thousand women in that building, Waterloo Bridge House. You could see them all gradually getting older and older and older. And us younger ones used to really despise them as they hadn’t got married. There were a lot of them because, in that generation, all the men had been killed in the war. We used to think, ‘We’re not going to stay here till we’re sixty, like those spinsters.’So everybody did their damnedest to get a bloke. It didn’t matter who it was as long as it wore trousers. Then they used to come in and flaunt their engagement rings. We had little celebration parties. They’d be flashing this diamond and all the others would be as jealous as hell. It was terrible. There were six of us friends. They all gradually got engaged, and then there was me left. People used to think I was peculiar. I felt awful, like some strange, weird monster.The supervisor was a spinster. She was a cow! In her fifties. We thought she was ghastly, fancy being a miss. We were horrible, but that was the pattern. In those days you really despised anyone who wasn’t married by at least twenty-five. These poor souls. It was pitiful really. There was one - she was always writing to Lonelyhearts clubs. Rather like Jean Rhys, that type of person. She was always heavily painted - rouge, lipstick, ginger hair. Just to try and get a man. I don’t think she ever got anybody. It was terribly sad. But, of course, we used to laugh at her. When I joined women’s liberation, and I thought back to all those things, I felt terribly ashamed. But a lot of it still goes on, right?I was very tall, and whenever I went to a dance I always used to get midgets who hung round my waist and laid their heads on my bosom. I felt absolutely awful. The only way to pick up a boy was to go to a dance. We used to go to the Lyceum Ballroom, which I thought was, oh my dear, the absolute ultimate in sophistication. We’d all stand round like the cattle market - just stand there. All my friends would get blokes - but when they saw how tall I was I never got a partner. They’d look you up and down. Most humiliating. I felt really sad, really down. I thought I’d never get a bloke.I was twenty-six when I met Dad. I was really on the back of the shelf, covered in dust, beginning to give up hope. My elder sister had said, ‘Look, Luce, it’s time you got married, and if you don’t hurry up, you’ve had it.’ People used to say to my mum, ‘Isn’t it terrible Lucy’s not married.’ I think my poor old Mum felt a bit funny about it. She’d say, ‘Well, she doesn’t like men.’ It was just something to say. But, of course, it was the worst thing she could’ve said.Then there was that famous occasion on Wood Street Station when I met Dad. The worst day of my life. Why I ever did it, I’ll never know. Mind you, I was twenty-six. I’d just got over typhoid fever and I was bald. My head was covered in down! I used to wear hats all the time. Dad didn’t care tuppence what I looked like, as long as I was tall. When Dad asked me out, I thought it was wonderful. At long last! That was the beginning of the end, of the rot. But I wouldn’t have had you and Joy, otherwise, would I?Dad was a male chauvinist pig - as were most of his generation. I can remember my mum cleaning out my father’s shoes. There she was, putting the blacking on. His slippers were always ready for him although he was a right bastard. But it was the recognized thing. The women waited on men hand and foot.With Dad I did the same. You didn’t expect them to do anything. Of course you hadn’t done anything all day, except slog and wash and iron and cook and clean. But Dad was always saying how stupid women were. They couldn’t be very good mothers, let alone anything else. He thought the women in his office were silly. It was only in the last year of his life that he admitted one or two women comptometers in his office in Smithfields were quite bright. But grudgingly.He had a very low opinion of women and, of course, it rubs off on you in the end. I knew I knew more than Dad, or different things anyhow. He didn’t know French, for example. But he said it to me so often that I really thought I was stupid. It wasn’t really till women’s liberation that I changed my mind a bit. Silly, isn’t it? All those years. Even now I’ve got no confidence in myself. Never will have now. It’s amazing- men are doing that all the time. But now, with some women, the fact that they’ve gone out to work has given them a bit of confidence, just from doing a job. But on the other hand, when you see some women, especially young ones, how they take everything from men- but everything- it makes you weep. They run around, wait on the men, even some married ones in women’s liberation groups.Dad started drinking soon after we were married. He had always been waited on hand and foot by his mother. He never did a thing there. Of course, his father was a drunk too. Grandma [Lucy’s mother­ in-law] sometimes had both of them lying on the kitchen floor, drunk father and son. But Grandma thought Dad was the cat’s whiskers, right to the end, no matter what he did. He thought I was going to carry on where she left off. Which, of course, I did. I used to have the meal ready every evening. He never came in till midnight. Every night there was meat and two veg. In the end, I didn’t bother to cook it, do you blame me?I waited up every night in terror. For thirty years you sit there with your heart thumping. That’s going to affect your body in the end, isn’t it? Wears it out, you can’t cope. Maybe that’s why I had that heart attack recently. Hearing his footsteps coming up the road - an accumulation of that for years and you don’t have that high an opinion of men and marriage....Women’s liberation was such a revelation to me. Let’s be free, be somebody in our own right, not just an adjunct to a man. That, to me, was marvellous. That first march we went on on my birthday. I really enjoyed that, walking. ‘What do we want? LIBERATION.’ To me that was absolutely the ultimate. A woman of my age, walking down the Strand, shouting ‘Liberation’. Cor! Blimey!We were really downtrodden, our generation. I wish they could all come now.SR. 31, January 1975
Thursday, 21 AugustANN TALKS TO LYNN PEARSONAnn lives with her husband Terry and their baby Karen on a Midlands council estate. They’ve been married three years. Their flat is eight floors up in one of the six highrise blocks on the estate, overlooking the near-by car works where Terry works as a drilling machine operator. Ann told Lynn Pearson about a day in her life- a day shared by millions of women.       Linda CooperWhat do I do all day? Well, I don’t have any set routine except for getting the baby to bed, and getting her meals - apart from that I just do things when I feel like doing them. We’ve lived here two and a half years - we just wanted a place, nowhere special, and they gave us this one - we’d have taken anywhere. We’re going to move soon, though, to another part of the city, where there’s a ground-floor maisonette with a garden.I have breakfast with Karen at about 8.30, and then get out to do the shopping. I take Karen with me - I shop each day of the week, as that’s the only time I get out. If I bought everything in one big lot, I’d have nothing to buy during the week...I get home about 10.30 and put Karen to bed, then I make a cup of coffee, a piece of toast and read the Mirror. People here don’t seem to want to talk even when you do see them - I think it’s because of the flats, people are all shut up; you can be inside your flat, and you don’t know what’s going on outside. I can’t stand the peace and quiet, I’d much rather have a noisy place with people around. You never see anybody from one day to the next, and the baby, she’s terrified of other kids, she never sees any.When the children get bored, it gets the parents down, so the parents get depressed. Most of the mothers here are more worried about their kids than themselves, as they are going to be the parents of the future; mothers can get over being depressed. I’d like to see some sort of playschool, but something that the mothers could join in with. There is a playschool at the school across the road, but it’s only for one day a week and there’s a waiting list for it. The community centre is quite near, but all l use it for is the welfare- I take Karen there. The only other thing they have there is bingo, and I won’t go to that. I’d like to see a play area nearer to the community centre, connected with it. And I’d like a library a bit nearer than the one we’ve got now. But the main thing wrong with the area is too many flats - I’d like to see more houses built, not flats.After I have my coffee I do the housework - ironing, washing, you know. I wouldn’t want to go back to working full time; I don’t regret giving it up at all. What I did like about it, though, was seeing people ­ I’m not even seeing much of Terry at the moment because he’s working for my brother-in-law at the weekends, on their house, apart from his other job. He’s practically living over there at the moment...I get Karen up at 12.30 and give her some dinner while I’m having mine listening to Radio I. I play with Karen, and then rake her out to the play area for half an hour. She plays on the slide and frames - this is fine in the summer, but unpleasant in the winter, when the wind sweeps across between the blocks. I put her to bed about 3.00 and then do some more housework. I have a cigarette and a cup of coffee about 3.30, and watch the racing on TV, if there’s any on. I give Karen her tea at 4.30, and then she has a bath. She goes to bed about 6.oo. Terry gets home about 6.30, so I get his tea ready for him, and we have tea together when he gets home. The TV’s on all the time, but we don’t always watch it.Terry sometimes goes out in the evenings, but I can’t get a babysitter, and we can’t afford a proper babyminder, so I don’t go out. I don’t mind too much, but I’d like to be able to go out occasionally – it’s depressing being in all the time. I miss things we used to do before I had the baby - we used to go for a meal, or a drink, or to a club if there was something special on. We used to go to discos before we got married, but after that, we just stopped. I watch TV in the evenings, and I have a couple of puzzle books I like doing.I thought about getting a job at home, as I get so depressed, but if you send off for lists of jobs, all you get is lists of addresses you’re supposed to write to. And most of the jobs involve selling - I don’t like that, making your friends buy things. I like filling forms in - the moment the tax form comes through the door, I sit down and fill it in. I suppose that’s why I like crosswords and puzzles, I can do them while I’m watching the television. I watch TV until the programmes finish, or go to bed a bit before that, about 11.00.This area’s got shops, a good bus service, pubs, social clubs, plenty of green space - it’s all nice except the factory - it’s just the women in the flats... During the holidays, it would be good to have somewhere the kids could go in the mornings - it’s the eight, nine, ten-year-olds, twelve-year-olds who do all the vandalism - they’re just bored, they shouldn’t be at that age. The council have bought a big area which used to be the factory apprentices’ playing fields, but they haven’t done anything with it. There’s a play area down there, but if something happens, if they fall over and crack their heads, it’s too far down -by the time you’ve got our of the door, got the lift and got down there, it’s too late. I don’t know how to find our if there’s a playschool where we’re moving to - but just being out of the flat will make it better, Karen will be able to play outside in the garden. I think kids ought to be able to enjoy themselves while they’re young...SR.60, July 1977
Caring for the DisabledANNA BRIGGS... Pat is in her late thirties and looks after Vicky who is mentally handicapped and spastic after whooping cough at five months. She is now eight.‘she’s in hospital for a week the thirtieth time in two years), partly because I can’t cope and partly because she wasn’t eating for no apparent reason. In the last eight weeks she’s had two upper respiratory infections, three urinary tract infections and she’s been fining a lot because she suddenly won’t take the anti-convulsant tablets. It just got me down and I couldn’t see an end. Three times a day I was having a battle feeding her... We can’t leave her with babysitters because of fits, so Ken and I never go out together. He sometimes goes out on his own but I don’t because there’s nowhere to go on my own... I just felt the other day that I couldn’t go on. Every time I leave her she cries, when she’s poorly. Ken has to bath her because I have a worn disc and sciatica and she’s already heavy to lift. I’m always amazed by the fuss people make over a problem with a possible solution, when there are problems like this with no solution. I sometimes wonder if it’s worth bothering - you don’t live a normal life at all - you can’t plan anything in advance - you don’t even know if you’re going to get a good night ‘s sleep - some of the things no one can help you with’...SR.81, April 1979
Living with a Difference:Cypriot StoriesAYSE, MARIA AND ZEYNEP...I was brought up to think the one aim in life is to grow up and get married. Nothing like most of you, probably, when you can grow up and fall in love and marry. You see, my marriage will be arranged. They will introduce me to a man and if I like him, and him me, we will probably get engaged and within months be married.The first time a man was introduced to me was when I was fourteen I was at a party when a mother and her son approached us. But my mum turned them away saying I was too young.At a few other weddings mums would come up to my mum and say, ‘I have got a lovely son and what a nice match he would be for your daughter.’ This made me feel a bit sick knowing that all these mothers wanted me to marry their sons. But what got me extra mad was that they asked my mum - it wasn’t her that they were going to marry their sons to, it was me (not that I wanted to marry them, but till they might ask me).This carried on for a few years until I was sixteen when one of my mum’s cousins came to visit and asked my mum if he could speak to her in private. Well, I knew what it was going to be about when I heard that he wanted to speak to her alone. When my mum returned and told me he was going to bring a certain family to visit us I said to her that didn’t want to meet one of their stupid boys and I didn’t want to get married, I told her I just couldn’t fall in love like that and I didn’t want to end up like her.For the first time ever my mum listened to me and said, ‘I understand what you mean and don’t worry. I won’t let you get married.’Two weeks later a knock came at the door. My sister answered it and took whoever it was into the front room to my mum. Then she came running to the kitchen and said, ‘They’re here.’ I said, ‘Who’s here?’ and she said, ‘You know, that family - that boy Mum’s cousin wants you to marry.’I started to laugh. Then my mum came in and said, ‘Quick, let’s make the tea so they can hurry up and go.’ I asked my mum if I had to go in and she said, ‘Yes, just present yourself, give out the tea and just sit there.’I knew I wasn’t going to enjoy myself but we made the tea and went in. I gave it out and noticed I was being watched by the mother and the family. I thought to myself, ‘Now I know what it’s like when the cows are at the market being sold.’ I felt just like them. I sat down and just listened to the conversation and of course let off the occasional smile. By then I was beginning to wonder where on earth as the boy they wanted me to meet. And what a shock I get when I was told who it was - he was no boy, he must have been twenty-six or twenty-even. It was terrible. My every move was being watched. So when I heard the mother say, ‘Well, we must be going now’, what a big smile the words put on my face.They said goodbye and left, but before they left his mother said to my mum, ‘What a nice daughter you have.’ We didn’t hear from them till the next week and they told us that the ‘boy’ wanted to marry me. ‘How stupid,’ I thought. ‘He doesn’t even know me and he wants to marry me.’Well, they were waiting for my reply and said that I could have a few days to think it over but I said I didn’t need another second, my answer was no. A few weeks later I heard that this man was getting married to a girl whose father had a factory. ‘How awful,’ I thought, ‘he doesn’t even know her, he probably doesn’t love her, but he wants to marry her. I suppose it’s her money he wants more than her.’My next one was a rich man. My brother-in-law works for this man, and he invited me and my sister down for a meal. But he also said to my sister to make sure I looked older, and extra special. Myself, I didn’t have a clue what he was up to until we arrived. My brother-in­ law was sitting at a table laid for four. We sat down and my sister said, ‘Right. When are we going to eat?’ My brother-in-law said, ‘Not yet, we are waiting for someone to come.’ Then he dashed up to go to the door - anyone would have thought the Queen was coming.Then, when I saw the man I knew what I’d really been invited down for. I felt awful, as if I was after him, and that was why I was there. I didn’t feel hungry any more and neither did my sister. She knew I was uncomfortable so she suggested we went to wash our hands. When we were doing this I said to her, ‘You should have told me that was the real reason we came here.’ She said that she didn’t know, that he probably never told me because he knew that then I wouldn’t come. We went back up and they were still talking. I noticed that he kept watching me but I didn’t even so much as look at his face. I said to myself, ‘I bet I could pick up a better man in the streets.’We had a drink, then he drove us home. He came in and my mum made him a cup of coffee- all this time I was playing with my niece. When he had finished his coffee my brother-in-law called me and told me to take his cup. I just took it and put it on the tray. A few minutes later he left. My brother-in-law asked me what I thought of him; I said l hated him. He said, ‘You mean you wouldn’t have him? But what about all his money, his car, and his business?’ I said, ‘He can stuff his money etc. down his throat and if he is out to buy a wife he can look elsewhere because he isn’t getting me.’ A few days later I heard that he wanted me, so I just said, ‘Hard cheese, I am not up for sale.’Now every time I hear anything about arranged marriages or one of my relatives saying some boy is very nice I just feel sick and say I don’t want anyone.Since I never had a father my uncle acted like one. When he heard that I was staying on at school for the sixth form his first question wasn’t ‘Are you staying on for a better job and grades?’ it was ‘Is there a boy or teacher you love, is that why you’re staying on at school?’ One of my real reasons was that if I left I probably would have got married.Not that I would have been forced. I just would probably have got so fed up saying no that I would have eventually taken the next man available, just to get myself out of the house.My uncle told me to watch the boys at school and not to fall for any. But this I couldn’t obey. You can’t help liking a boy - you can’t stop yourself just because your uncle says so. I liked this certain boy for three months. I tried my best to talk to him but every time I did I remembered my uncle, so it was hopeless. I remember once when a boy I had liked for ages tried to kiss me and I wouldn’t let him - he probably thought I didn’t like it but how could I explain to him about my family life and my uncle who always told me it was wrong to do a thing like this?Now that I’ve left school I know I won’t get another chance to go out to school dances or anything. But I’ve already told them that I shall be joining evening classes at my school, then at least I can go out. It isn’t anywhere special but at least it’s somewhere.In the past few weeks I’ve liked another boy, and now that I have left school I probably won’t see him any more unless I bump into him on the street. I have still not got over him.I hope one day I find a Turkish boy and fall for him straight away. But until then I ‘m saying no to all these other pigs...To protect the writers of this article, all names have been changed.SR.39, September 1975
Devil ChildrenMARGARET WALTERSThere’s one genuinely terrifying scene in The Omen. Katherine (Lee Remick) is standing on a chair in her hall gallery to water some hanging plants; her small son, riding his tricycle ferociously, slams into the chair, and with dizzying slowness, she falls over the banister to the floor below. He stands and watches.As you’ve probably gathered, The Omen is about a child who’s not just possessed, but perhaps the devil himself. Despite desperate efforts by his father- Gregory Peck not wholly convincing as the American Ambassador in London - first to understand then to destroy him, the devil-child wins hands down. At the end of the movie, his parents and three other people who got in his way, are gorily dead; the boy has been adopted by daddy’s old buddy who just happens to be president of the US.This thriller - skilfully made but altogether predictable - grossed over $25 million in its first six months in the States, and is cleaning up in England. It’s partly due to clever publicity - it was released in the States on the 6th day of the 6th month, ‘76, which you’ll remember was a devilishly significant date in the movie. But The Omen - like its predecessors Rosemary’s Baby, recently shown again on TV, or the block-busting The Exorcist- clearly touches on some sensitive nerve in audiences. I suspect we’re going to see many more movies in this genre: indeed, Exorcise II is already in the works.Despite all the sensational publicity about levitation and head­ turnings in The Exorcise, the scenes I remember are the early ones where the tough, working mother, who’s bringing up her daughter alone, realizes something is wrong with her child. During her mother’s smart party, the girl gets out of bed and pisses on the floor in front of the startled guests; she’s sullen, inaccessible and destructive. And similarly The Omen hooks us, not by the scary sequences - melodramatic storms, a pack of wild dogs in a deserted Italian cemetery- but during the quiet domestic scenes that open the film.At some level, all those films are concerned, not with black magic, but the ambivalent feelings between parents and children. The fantasy of a child possessed by the devil is rooted in doubts and contradictions we’re all familiar with. Thus Katherine in The Omen is jealously over­ protective of her son. (Her too-desperate need of a child, it’s suggested, is the source of all the trouble: when her own baby dies at birth, her husband, fearing for her sanity substitutes a foundling.) As the family walks by the river, the small boy maliciously scares his careful parents by hiding from them; later, forced into his best clothes, he refuses hysterically to be dragged into a smart church wedding. Proofs of a diabolic nature - or perfectly ordinary acts of childhood rebellion?Again, Katherine’s growing uneasiness about her child is only too familiar. Though her whole life is built around her love for her son, she’s irritated by his noisiness, resents his demands and fears his wild energy. Consumed by guilt, she confesses to a psychiatrist her hatred and her fantasy that he’s not really ‘her’ child. He treats her as a perfectly ‘normal’ neurotic- which she is.I’m convinced that the real power of movies like The Omen and The Exorcist lies in the skill with which they play, subliminally, on the whole complex of mixed and painful feelings within the family. They evoke the guilty resentment beneath maternal love, and the anger, known by the most loving parents, at the way a child disrupts their lives. They hook into the woman’s fantasy that she might give birth to a monster, terrifying and alien - but a monster that externalizes every ­ thing dark and evil within herself. The films hint that these evil children are a punishment on the parents - and at the same time suggest that, since the evil is satanic, supernatural, the parents are not really responsible after all. The Exorcist certainly implied that the sexy, independent mother was being punished for her lifestyle - and it offered the audience the sadistic spectacle of the child being battered back to normality. And at the climax of The Omen, the father actually tries to kill his own child: to exorcise the devil or his own overwhelming fear and hatred?It’s easy to dismiss these films as merely fashionable and implausible fantasies dreamed up by a cash-conscious Hollywood. But only recently, and here in England, a man and woman were tried for murdering their small daughter believing that she was inhabited by the devil, that they were ridding the world of an evil and destructive force. That terrifying, but by no means unprecedented incident, perhaps suggests that we should try more seriously to understand the success of these devil movies and the fantasies – in all of us that they exploit so skilfully.SR.53, December 1976       Liz Mackie, SR.19, January 1974
Out of the Closet into the CourtsELEANOR STEPHESThere have always been children brought up by parents who are homo­ sexual, but until recently their homosexuality has been a closely guarded secret. More and more women are now choosing to live openly as lesbians in relationships with their lovers, and if they have children they are also asserting their right to be lesbians and mothers. It is a risk anyway to come out as a homosexual and, because of prejudice in the law involving custody of children, lesbian mothers are finding that the risk involves losing their children.When a woman who is a lesbian is unlucky enough to have to go to court to fight for custody she has at the moment no chance of winning. The judge always awards custody to the father. The most the mother can hope for is ‘access’ - the right to visit the children who have lived with her from birth and often for long periods since separating from her husband. (Recently in America cases have been won, usually on appeal.)The assumption of the courts and the judges, who alone make this decision, is that a lesbian cannot by definition be a good mother, so it must always be in the interests of the children to live apart from her. Normally in ‘tug-of-love’ cases the courts would give custody to the mother since childcare is assumed to be the woman’s role. The husband may participate in major decisions, contribute financially and have access at weekends and holidays. The judge will only separate children from their mother if there are over-riding factors like the mother’s health, or actual neglect or cruelty. Such considerations are obviously relevant to the children’s welfare.The mother’s sexual orientation is taken to be just such a factor, and no other evidence has to be produced to disqualify her from bringing up her children. One judge, considered to hold relatively liberal views, went to some lengths to explain that while he did not attribute blame to the mother for her lesbianism, and could even go so far as to sympathize with her, it was vital that the court distinguish between understanding and approval. To approve of homosexuality, he said, would mean the decay of society as we know it and could only corrupt others.A lesbian with openly feminist ideas poses a double threat. She is seen as a direct challenge to family life and the traditional sexual roles which the courts uphold. A head-on political clash takes place with all the power on one side. (A few cases have been lost by women only because of their feminist involvement, without the added stigma of lesbianism.)In one of the early cases, much was made of the mother having subversive feminist literature in her home- magazines like Spare Rib and Shrew were used as evidence against her- and she was accused of exposing her children to ‘an exotic atmosphere in which intellectual opinions expressing themselves as an eagerness for total feminine freedom, sexual and otherwise, will have a marked influence’. The judge declared that her ‘passionate interest in the women’s liberation movement ‘ was likely to mean that her daughters would grow up with ‘little or no respect for the ordinary obligations of family life’ and ‘be exposed to propaganda about sexual morality which could expose them to quite extraordinary risks in adolescence’. Having painted this picture of life in what he described as an unhealthy ‘milieu of feminine fanaticism’ he then felt quite justified in ‘protecting’ the children involved by separating them from their mother.The fact of women living together and raising children without men poses the most extraordinary threat to these guardians of the status quo. The court functions like a male club whose ageing members wield absolute power over people’s lives and who automatically sympathize with the husband. An American judge spelt this out only too well:It is difficult to conceive of a more grievous indignity to which a person of normal psychological and sexual constitution could be exposed than the entry by his spouse upon an active and continuous course of homosexual love with another. Added to the insult to sexual loyalty per se (which is present in ordinary adultery) is the natural revulsion arising from the knowledge of the fact that the spouse’s betrayal takes the form of a perversion1. Common sense and modern psychiatric knowledge concur as to the incompatibility of homosexuality and the subsistence of marriage between one so afflicted and a normal person.Some judges may pay lip service to more liberal views, but these are the kind of attitudes underlying courtroom debate. The choice is seen to lie between the stigmatized, afflicted deviant, and the ‘normal’ husband who presents the very picture of decent, solid virtues, often with new wife and mother-substitute in row. The verdict comes as no surprise.But the courtroom is not just a theatre of the absurd. It has terrible implications for the women and children concerned. Gillian, who has no chance at all of winning custody, said to me: ‘If I had known when I left my husband how it would turn out with my children, I sometimes wonder if I would have gone through with it.’ None of the women I spoke with regretted making this change but they all questioned that they should pay so high a price for their right to live and love as they chose.Sue lives with her five-year-old son John and her lover Mary in the West Country. They have been living together for two years since Sue left her husband. Their home would appear to be everything a court could ask for, an idyllic place to raise a young child; they have many acres of woodland with streams running through, and have lots of friends and relatives, so John has plenty of contact with people of both sexes.When Sue, after five years of marriage, told her husband about her relationship with Mary, he explained that he had been having a long­term affair which Sue knew nothing about, and asked that John live with him and his girlfriend. Sue agreed because she knew she had little chance of winning a contested custody case. But very soon the girl­friend left and John’s father couldn’t cope without female help, so he returned John to his mother. This to-ing and fro-ing happened again, and Sue decided it was best for John to make his home and with her and Mary.‘John’s father agreed with him living with us, and relations between us were quite friendly to begin with; I made sure John saw his father regularly. Then I had the impression that he got worried and rushed around to find a new woman. He found someone very competent and impressive whom he married two days after our divorce. Once she appeared on the scene, it was obvious they would fight to take John away, and everything became very strained and unpleasant. We first went to court last year. The judge said he didn’t like tug-of-love cases and sent us outside to work it out. To our surprise the two barristers agreed to keep the status quo and leave John, who was only just four, with us. That’s why it’s all the more infuriating to lose now.’Sue went to court last month with what looked to be a very strong case. She had an excellent team of feminist lawyers and very good reports from welfare workers, psychiatrists, character witnesses and all the rest. The very young age of the child made it less likely that he would be removed from his mother. Against this was the fact that the father offered a mother-substitute in a heterosexual family with the possibility of new brothers and sisters. While the judge allowed that all four contenders were ‘attractive personalities’ he approved particularly of the new wife. ‘she is the only adult without psychiatric blemish.’ (The judge even reprimanded Sue for not having made friends with this fine woman who was trying to take her child away! Incidentally, Sue and Mary’s only ‘psychiatric blemish’ was their homosexuality.)The Judge granted that there was little to choose between the two homes, and that John had an excellent relationship with his mother, so the judgement was based on the ‘problem’ of the mother’s sexual orientation. Both parties produced psychiatric reports on the possible effects of a child brought up in a lesbian household and the judge chose to accept the negative conclusions of the husband’s witness, a psychiatrist who wrote: ‘John’s mother practises statistically abnormal sexual acts which can be looked upon either as a deviation from normal or frankly perverted. I have no evidence before me to state that this environment will not affect John’s future emotional and psycho-sexual development. In the absence of a father or father-figure male identification is not possible unless a substitute father is provided and this, within the setting of a homosexual environment, would not be satisfactory. The only person or persons John would be able to identify with would be his mother and her cohabitee and sooner or later he must learn that they engage in unnatural acts. It would be difficult to imagine that this young boy could go through his adolescent period of development without feeling shame and embarrassment, of having a mother who has elected to engage in sexual practices which are statistically abnormal. I think it would be agreed by a large body of practising clinical psychiatrists that persons who engage in homosexual patterns of behaviour have personality difficulties.’Most of these assertions are just that - unfounded assertions – but they carried weight in court rather than the report from the mother’s psychiatrist which was much more moderate and emphasized the quality of the mother-child relationship. (As Sue said afterwards, do they think John is going to grow up to be a statistician?!)Unfortunately there is no documentation on children raised in homosexual families so there is nothing with which to counter the traditional prejudices on their own terms. Sue thought this could have made a difference in her case: ‘We desperately need some research on all this. If we could have said in court, “Look, here is a study of fifty children who’ve grown up with lesbian mothers and they’re no different from other kids” (heterosexual, whatever, since we have to fight this on their terms at present), I believe this would have had a tremendous effect. It would undermine some of the statements they make which are based on nothing but prejudice and ridiculous myths about homosexuals. We also need people who’ve been brought up by homosexual parents to come out and say so. Our judge ended his summing up, “These are uncharted waters which I’m not prepared to sail on.” Instead he chooses to remove a young child from the home where he’s happy and place him in a new situation. We have to have these waters seen to be charted, that’s a priority.’By the time you read this, John will have left his mother’s home and been moved to his father. Sue is allowed access once a fortnight and part of school holidays, although the ex-husband said in court that he may not be able to afford his half of the travel expenses for John to visit his mother. The judge insisted that John be ‘protected from the lesbian relationship’ and that when he visits, the two women must sleep apart and be ‘just friends’. Such an invasion of privacy is quite common; a couple who, out of fear of losing what little they had, followed this injunction found that the children were upset by the change. They assumed their mother and lover had quarrelled and that something was wrong for them to be more distant.After the judgement, Sue wrote: ‘I really do not know how to find words to express my reaction to this delicate queer-bashing. Anyone would think that the sexual aspect of our relationship is the be-all and end-all. I love John and can’t envisage life without him but it seems that at the moment there is nothing we can do; we have been advised that it would be pointless to appeal. I suppose we have paid the price for our love and we are both very sore at the cost. We shall never lose these battle scars completely and the judgement will stick in our throats       Alison Fell, SR. 65, December 1977every time we try to swallow it - like trying to swallow a whole ostrich egg. If we can fight to make things different for other people in the future we shall do so. And we certainly do not intend to be ostriches.’ The obsession with the mother’s sexuality is striking in many cases and the husband may dwell on details designed to reinforce the court’s phobia of lesbianism. One man, for instance, described how he had found marks on the pillows of his wife’s double bed showing they had been depressed by two heads! The courts apply a double standard to the question of the lesbian couple showing any physical affection to each other with children around: in a heterosexual relationship this is thought to be good for the children by contributing to a loving, secure atmosphere, but it is considered detrimental - almost obscene - in a homosexual relationship.The myth of lesbians as child molesters is often in evidence and the courts may ask the mother how she will manage if her women friends make sexual advances to her daughters. It is hard to believe that the judge would voice his concern about a woman’s new husband seducing her daughter- though it is far more likely to happen.As Sue’s case showed, the new wife, although often a complete stranger to the children, plays an important part in strengthening her husband’s claim for custody, particularly if she has children herself. His lawyers paint her as the picture of respectability and draw maximum contrast between her and the ‘deviant’ mother. One such woman who made an excellent impression on the judge, exploited her conventionality to the full: ‘I’m really just a Marks and Sparks sort of person’, was how she described herself in court.Although the custody battle is assumed to be between the mother and the father who both wish to bring up the children, once the father has custody he often plays a minimal part in their daily lives. If he has not remarried, the children may be cared for by relatives or a succession of housekeepers. A woman who has lost custody told me that one of the saddest things was the fact that her children had been looked after by ten au pairs in fifteen months. By taking the children away from their mother, the court may be depriving them of any close parental relationship whatsoever.Gillian is unable even to get regular access to see her two young children. She has no chance at all of custody. During the last two years since she left her husband and children, there have been a succession of court orders for access which her husband consistently obstructs. From the moment she told him about her feelings for Jane, who was also married with a young child, his attitude has been vindictive and punitive using the children as weapons. He immediately gave her an ultimatum to leave (‘I don’t want my children touched by a lesbian’) or to stop seeing Jane, give up her job and never go out without him. Under this pressure she and Jane decided to leave for London straight away. ‘Looking back, we should have taken the kids with us. I would advise women to do that if they possibly can - but how could we? We were both under incredible strain, set off at once and slept the first nights in the car. We knew no one in London – we even went to sex shops in Soho to find out about gay organizations!’Jane’s husband was already having an affair with a woman who he later married and he has been relatively co-operative about their child. She goes up to see her every fortnight and the child comes to stay with them in the holidays.Gillian had hoped for a similar arrangement with her husband but she has had to fight all the way. ‘My case was badly mishandled by my solicitors, who didn’t bother to go for custody at the time of the divorce. It’s very important to do this or later it’s used as evidence that you didn’t care about your children. Now it’s a struggle just to see them at all. My daughter, who I was very close to, has been turned against me by her father and says now that she doesn’t want to see me. He’s told her I’m abnormal and don’t want to be her mother. Once I managed to talk to her on the phone while he was out. He punished me for this by not bringing the children to meet me after I’d driven a long way to see them. He has become completely vindictive, while maintaining that he’s trying to protect the children from being contaminated by me. When you remember that two years ago, Jane and I spent all our time together with the children, we even had plans to go on holiday together; now I can’t even see them without a chaperone! I think he’s hoping that if he makes life hard enough we’ll give up. But we won’t, we’ll fight it to the House of Lords if necessary.’Of course many women never do fight their cases because they know they have no chance of winning, so these injustices remain invisible. The cases that have come to court reveal a phobia not just of lesbianism but of nonconformity in general: people who deviate from society’s ideas of what is normal are penalized. They show a striking resemblance to American custody cases involving inter-racial marriages - the non-white, minority-group parent loses custody.Time and again fears that that children will grow up homosexual and be influenced in its favour, and that the social stigma against homosexuality will harm the child, are taken as facts to be used as evidence. One American Judge of the Pennsylvanian Supreme Court did try to counter these biases, but he is an exception: ‘If the children are raised in a happy and stable home, they will be able to cope with prejudice and hopefully learn that people are unique individuals who should be treated as such.’ Perhaps this can give us some hope for English court decisions, though at the moment it seems to me that the backlash of intolerance which is growing in the present crisis make the outlook grim.Homosexuality is not a crime, a sin or a disease; it need not even be a problem if society did not make it so for many. What is meant to be at issue in a custody case (and I believe the entire custody system needs to be challenged) is the interest and wellbeing of the children, some-       From Up from Under, 1973, SR.42, December 1975thing the recent Children’s Act emphasized. So the crucial factor is what the person is like as a parent. Neither heterosexuality nor homosexuality are in themselves guarantees of good parenthood; how the parent defines herself (or himself), her religion, politics, lifestyle or sexual preference is irrelevant. If the court is to question someone’s ‘fitness’ to be a parent it must be on grounds that would apply to anyone - lesbian or heterosexual, Black Muslim or macrobiotic.A pressure group, Action for Lesbian Parents (ALP), is working to publicize this injustice in the legal system and to promote research on children growing up in homosexual families. It is crucial that all of us who feel strongly about this blatant anti-woman prejudice make our voices heard. We urge you to contact ALP c/o Spare Rib if you can help in any way.Minor details have been changed in this article to preserve anonymity. Court quotes are from notes written in court, not from official transcriptsSR. 50, September 1976
‘I Keep Digging Our Relationship Up’SUE COXJohn and I aren’t married, although we’ve been living together for a couple of year. I used to be fairly proud of that - escaping the legal but meaningless bonds and so on - now. I’m not so sure. Getting married is largely an outdated and hypocritical business and yet people still do it all the time. And looking at a lot of them it seems to me that their marriages were at least a declaration of confidence in the future; a declaration of sureness of feelings that I envy.John and I have never felt a security or confidence in each other. Or to be precise - I have never felt a security or confidence in my feelings for John. They wax and wane, that’s the trouble. Sometimes I feel so close to him and sometimes I hate him. Sometimes I am alive to his every move, and sometimes I am indifferent to him. And I know that these changes are brought about by my expectations which are so often disappointed. I want so much out of the relationship. I want a truly deep understanding and liking which will reassure me constantly that we are the best of friends, and I want a lover who is both passionate and tender. I want to be able to read his mind and his heart and I want him to read mine. To this end, I often lay my mind and heart out on a plate for him and then feel frustrated because he can’t or won’t or doesn’t need to do the same.Perhaps, in spite of my conscious rejection of the Woman’s Own ideal relationship, I am bogged down and wallowing in romantic hangovers that men don’t have. I have had a ‘good job’, and neither wanted marriage nor, so far, children, always a career and equality, and yet, even so, a relationship with a man has always been the thing of central importance in my life. But I can’t just let it happen. I worry at it. As John puts it - I keep digging it up to see if it’s growing.If anybody is the wronged party in our relationship it’s John. Because I don’t behave consistently towards him he is developing a guardedness and nervousness towards me. He can’t be sure what my reactions to anything will be and he can’t be sure whether I’ll come home at the end of the day with a smile or a scowl for him, and so he seems to hide himself so as not to get hurt, I suppose. And can you blame him?You may wonder at this mutual oppression. We have talked about splitting up, but as yet the ties are too tight. I’m sorry if this sounds like romantic mush, but I haven’t lived with John for two years and not known the good times. When I reach a phase of hardness and decide I must break the bonds for both our sakes, a phase of softness and affection follows close on its heels and no change results. Does this strike a chord with any of you? Notice that I say I must break the bonds. John wouldn’t, partly because he now has a new job in this town while I have just given one up, making it easier for me to move, and partly because he doesn’t make decisions easily. In fact, he’s even more laboured than me. I think he waits in the hope that some miracle cure will steady my temperament and all will end happily. I’ve hoped and I’m growing old waiting.If things aren’t so good, why don’t we try spreading our wings without talking about cataclysmic farewells and complete breaks? I don’t feel free enough to experiment. My freedom isn’t curtailed consciously by John; it’s curtailed more by my own temperament, conditioning and hang-ups. I believe in my head that living exclusively with one person of the opposite sex, with or without children, is a restricting and neurosis-producing business, but I am still light years from doing anything about it. I wonder if I set my sights too far. I have been looking for something high and wild. Should I recognize my own limitations imposed partly by my uneventful, middle-class, fairly spoiled upbringing, or should I strive for something I can’t yet identify- some soaring freedom perhaps, some strength that will bolster my spirit and make life a joy to wake up to every day?       Kate Hancock, SR.26, August 1974To come back to John and me. Sex, is predictably enough, a potential hang-up as well as a pleasure in this situation. John could fancy it any time. I can fancy it when and if the moment is right - usually when it arises out of a feeling of closeness through the sharing of something else. Because I know it’s frustrating for a bloke to be refused, and because I’m liking him well enough, even if not fancying him, I try to oblige. When I try to oblige I usually can’t. One tension brings on another. And the tension of my not really wanting him inside me makes it difficult for him. We both end up frustrated; physically because we’ve struggled for it like it’s a Big Money Prize. The Consumer Society. Other times, it’s just John who’s frustrated because I’m spark out when I hit the pillow.If two people share the same bed every night of the year, it strikes me as hardly surprising that their separate beings can’t always achieve a perfect union. When we make love, when we get that far, it’s usually great for both of us, and I wonder then why we don’t do it more often. I can’t get the hang of the warm-up. The transfer from feelings of warmth and gentleness to feelings of energy and desire is a hard one. And I have found myself often making this transfer by silently telling myself as we play with each other that I’m going to like this, aren’t I? Oh yes, if I can just stick with it a while how well rewarded will I be. So much for the Act of Love. John believes that if we made love more often our relationship would settle down. I believe that our sex life is a symptom of the disease.I am diverted by the phrase ‘settle down’. An expression that is totally abhorrent to me. I have a horror of settling down if it means banality, ordinariness, predictability. And I wonder if that is why I keep digging our relationship up to see if it’s growing. To create some trouble and drama? To shake it about so it doesn’t get boring? And yet I really don’t want this upset to go on. I am exhausted by my own inconsistency. What I really want, I suppose, is for the relationship to settle on a plane that is deeper and more fulfilling and exciting than what I take to be the norm behind the front doors down our road. But I am full of contradictions - I just said that I believe that one-to-one relationships are not ideal anyway. Please can I be excused my contradictions to a world that changes so fast?If John and I keep living together it may be because we have found some peace, or because change is too difficult. If we split up I may join a commune or I may get right down to the straight and narrow and acquire a smart hat and a regular bed time when I’m forty-five.One thing’s for sure- it’s a great strain living with a man whom you admire on one hand for his ability to shake off man of the accepted and odious norms of his sex, and whom you resent on the other hand with an unreasonable but ever present resentment for his maleness for the fact that he and his like have it easier than us. It seems to me that from this resentment comes a general anti-male feeling which I often find in Spare Rib, and it disturbs me. I think that women’s liberation is a prerequisite for people’s liberation, but if we come to hate our ‘oppressors’ in the process of freeing ourselves, what sort of world will we have made for ourselves? Is a world divided into opposing sexual camps more preferable than a world divided into the haves and have-nots?I love John. I hate him. I admire him. I resent him. But I want to be on the same side as him fighting the other buggers. And so, perhaps, I am holding back from the freedom of individuality. A cop out?SR.47, June 1976
Life on Social SecurityJANE HUTT AND MARY GILES TALKED TO ‘MARY’...It’s not ‘life’ on Social Security (S S), it’s ‘existence’. People in the government, whatever party, just don’t know what it’s like to be in the supermarket and have to add everything up as you go along to make sure you have enough money in your purse to pay the bill at the cash-desk. Single parents should get a lot more bloody money....I remember telling the woman from the S S that I had to cut down my own clothes to fit my eldest son. She said how lucky I was that I could save money in that way. Since then I’ve got a bit cheekier. I got money from the S S to buy a second-hand cooker recently. But I don’t bother now with grants for the children because they make you feel you’re begging...SR.85, August 1979
3	CHILDCAREWomen have been bound to their function in the family by the assumption that mothers bear the sole responsibility for looking after children and by the lack of alternative care.The attitude of successive governments towards nursery provision has been both punitive and cynical: women ‘ought’ to stay at home with young children- unless and until they are needed to join the work force. Thus, an unprecedented number of nursery places were founded and funded during the war years, and in the sixties spending curbs were relaxed to create places for the children of, ironically enough, teachers and nurses. Many more mothers now work than did during the war years. But the state’s policy on care of the under-fives is based neither on the mothers’ interests, nor on the welfare of the children.Enforced isolation with each other produces depression in both children and mothers- in the extreme, battering or suicide. A different desperation is experienced by mothers who go out to work, as do more than a quarter of women with pre-school age children. For most, finding childcare is not a once-and-for-all thing, but a constant, nerve-wracking juggling of arrangements which, as one mother put it, would defeat any pragmatic politician: ‘One morning to her mother, two to her father, two mornings with a neighbour; one afternoon to her mother, another to her father, two to a neighbour who takes her to a playgroup, one to another neighbour. And every week these sessions have to be reviewed and altered’ (SR.47).But the availability of part-time work shows that it is often in the interests of production to employ women and to fit working hours around childcare. Four out of five part-time workers are women. As Sarah Benton pointed out, employers say women should be grateful for part-time work whereas in fact part-time work is profitable for the employer: ‘They put out a lot of P R about how it suits women particularly with children. What they don’t say is productivity is considerably increased by having two separate four-hour shifts’(SR.11).Free full-time care is provided in state nurseries for just a tiny handful of children. Mothers and children have to be in the most desperate circumstances to gain a nursery place: they are selected by social workers on the grounds of relative misery and danger, and hundreds of ‘high priority’ children are still on council waiting lists. Full-time care in the few workplace nurseries is not free and is solely designed to recruit female labour; it is not available to men and has all the drawbacks of tied housing.Working mothers frequently have to turn to childminders: a case of the exploited exploiting the exploited. Childminders work long and tiring hours for a very low wage and without the benefit of paid holidays, sick leave, pension rights or any industrial protection. Many women childmind because it is the only work available to them. Childminders in Sutton formed an action group and formulated demands to transform their work. They proposed that they be employed by the local authority, receive ‘basic training in childcare’ and join the National Union of Public Employees (SR.28). There are other moves to alter the status of childcare, from being a maternal responsibility to being professionally recognized as work which can be done by either sex. Playgroups, adventure playgrounds and one o’clock clubs have all transformed the private, domestic nature of childcare into a community concern. Nurseries like Dartmouth Park Hill in North London and communal meeting places like Laurieston Hall in Scotland have challenged the idea of childcare as women’s work, insisting that men participate on an equal basis - not as highly qualified ‘experts’ - and spreading anti-sexist, anti-authoritarian methods beyond the private efforts of individual feminists.Over the last few years workers in these groups have also challenged the notion that community childcare is voluntary work, by demanding better pay, working conditions and facilities for the children.Some nurseries have been criticized for being ‘institutionalized, unjoyful places without strong attachments... organized in a very hierarchical way; with matrons in a mother/teacher/nurse/role, inducing fear in the hearts of workers, children and parents’ (SR.36). The majority of facilities are still only available to children aged four and over for short sessions during a school year and virtually exclude all children under two. They are not much help to the beleaguered mother of younger children and no use at all to mothers who go out to work.What women need and have been campaigning for at local, regional and national levels for the last decade is free childcare for all children, flexibly available for whatever hours mothers require. This basic demand does not mean that women are not concerned with how nurseries are run.
Changing ChildcareMARSHA ROWECollective childcare is a creative commitment which has absorbed the energy of many women in the women’s movement who do not have children themselves. Often their involvement began as an inspiration to help single or unsupported mothers. Alison, who now lives in a collective household in Leeds, recalled how her involvement began: ‘I was living in Oxford in an area where there were a lot of people I knew, with Hugo and Roger, and then a woman arrived from London who was pregnant and had nowhere to live.’ Sometimes it was battering which provoked a wife to search for a new life. Jenny, from London, became involved with Babs and her children in this way: ‘A group of us had taken a decision to live together. Babs was a battered wife we met a couple of years previously in the Claimants’ Union. She had Andy and another boy.’... At times the response of the women without children was spontaneous: ‘I don’t remember making any decision to say, yes, I’d be involved in collective childcare; it was all based on trust and naivety.’ It was something they felt fitted in with the particular directions of their own lives, so that their needs and the needs of the mothers appeared to meet in the collective form of life. There was the desire for kinship with other women, to share domestic labour between the sexes, to work for more equal and supportive relationships between eachother. And it was combined with a collective solution to economic inequality in one of the Manchester households when everyone shared their money, which gave the collective childcare a financial foundation.There were already two children in Jodie’s household when Fran decided to move in. Inexperienced, she had assumed that babysitting would not mean any alteration in the pattern of her existence. Subsequently it brought a profound personal change in her, a tie of feeling which, she puzzled, might not have happened if the children ‘had been younger, and if they went to bed earlier’. The children played their part: ‘Christine in particular makes a lot of fuss. At the best of times she doesn’t go to bed before 9.30 to 10.30. She goes through whole acts of sabotage, like putting vinegar in the honey.’ Fran feels that now her identity is bound up with the children and it is impossible to extricate herself from the relationship.Women’s susceptibility to taking on a nurturing role was also a motive, as when two of the women, Wendy and Jenny, agreed to help        Sara Fay, SR.51, October 1976after they became unemployed: ‘I thought what an altruistic thing it would be to look after other people’s kids.’ The duty to care, the old duty of femininity, lay hidden underneath their feminist aim to find a new form for the family. The contradiction only revealed itself to Jenny after she returned to her job: ‘I was unemployed at the time so I had more time to relate to the kids, and I think it was quite a mistake really because I haven’t got the time now and I’ve still got the emotional bond.’For Alison, who at the time thought procreation was repugnant, collective childcare was a chance to be close to children without pregnancy. When she decided to help bring up a friend’s baby two weeks after the birth, she realized the memory of her own upbringing initiated the idea of changing the parent-child relationship: ‘My mother was a very active, energetic woman and yet she felt she should stay at home and look after me, so there was all this energy going on to me. It was claustrophobic.’ To Alison and the others in her household, the relationship of love in childcare presented itself as an area of personal politics. They decided to set up a creche to share the work and to change the nature of parental love, to divide and share the emotional labour: ‘It was getting away from the idea of nuclear relationships where the children have to get their whole satisfaction and emotional support from just one person.’Rotas are a ‘practical necessity’ in most of the households and are usually sorted out into specific tasks rather than days of the week. In one household it is ‘Getting them up, dressing, taking them to school or nursery, picking them up, and being around until other people get in from work, then feeding them and putting them to bed.’ The weekend rota stays the same but people don’t put their names on a list: ‘It depends on who’s around and mucking in.’Rota systems have dangers. Jenny expressed worry that the children lose their identity as growing human beings and become mere extensions of a timetable, fragments of the housework. ‘Children are part of the housework rota.’ She feels divided against herself in going along with the mothers’ distance from the children: ‘I’m thinking of these children as a duty but it’s part of the whole definition of this house.’However, without a structure, Jodie doesn’t know where she is at times, and it produces hesitation and worry in her relationship to the mother of the child. She feels torn between anxiety that she doesn’t contribute enough to the childcare, and that if she did more she’d be ‘intruding’ on Louise’s relationship to the child : ‘I put Susan to bed if Louise is going our early, or if I want to, or if Susan wants me to. It’s difficult because I don’t think I can take any initiative over it.’ She is hesitant, reluctant in the face of the authority of the mother. But she stresses too, that it’s not a personal problem between her and Louise but part of the wider issue of having responsibility without control which is the cause of her conflict: ‘sometimes I have to put her to bed, but without deciding how, why, or when.’The activity of childcare calls on women without children in the same way as it does mothers, absorbing their being and dissolving their identity. ‘No matter what you plan, a child’s needs can just override all effort at organization.’ A full day’s childcare is ‘mind-deadening’, ‘grinding’, the day is ‘bitty’, divided into many distracting facets and it seems impossible to find the space or concentration even to write a letter. The childless woman’s existence can, like the mother’s, flee from her control, her sense of self vanish, to be replaced by the meaningless, moody reflection of an unceasing flow of demands and tasks.It is in the context of their feelings about children and the transformation of themselves during childcare that women find themselves in particular conflict. The women who are not mothers but who have devoted endless energy to children: have found themselves past the point of detachment from the children. Unlike nursery workers or childminders, their care for the children extends over twenty-four hours and they become non-biological parents. There is a passionate presence to their commitment which they feel parents and outsiders have not understood or have disregarded. They learn a parent’s responses to the children: ‘We worry about the kids being ill, etc., just the same’, and grief over the loss of a child expresses the intensity of the relationship, undefined yet deeply loving.Parents have asserted their proprietorial rights over children and taken them away from collective households without considering this relationship. The pain expressed by Alison was tumultuous and engulfing: ‘Cass left just over a year ago. After being with a group of us for three and a half years, he suddenly disappeared. It was really terrible. I experienced Cass being taken away as much worse than my mother dying, much worse than any sexual relationship being broken up. A lot of summer is blanked out because the feeling was so bad. If l had been the biological mother everyone would have been very understanding. People don’t understand how you can feel about a child who didn’t come out of your own body.’ The sense of renewal, the joy, fascination and revival of wonder which comes at the birth of a baby are not merely the prerogative of maternity. The birth can also be a tender, shared rediscovery of energy for non-biological parents. The mothering can be undertaken by a group from the child’s first weeks of life. In Alison’s household this happened twice and she talks about the children with the familiar, confident knowledge usually only associated with a mother: ‘she had the baby in hospital and came out after forty-eight hours. She only breastfed for two weeks so we were all taking turns to get him up at night. Cass was a very easy baby, he slept lots, woke up and was fed and went back to sleep. He was pretty cheerful. He was thirteen and a half months when Maya was born. Maya wasn’t breastfed because Penny couldn’t manage it and so that meant everyone shared it as before. When she was a tiny baby she slept in a carrycot in different people’s rooms.’This particular group formed a crèche which operated between two households after a time, with two different adults out of a total of eight men and women looking after four children a day: ‘depending on different people’s jobs, commitment and preference’. Wendy described their rota system with some amusement: ‘All the kids stayed at our house at some point. One night there’d be no kids and the next night two kids. We had these immense rotas. One time we had a six-colour coded rota as to where all the kids were. They didn’t necessarily spend the night at the same place as they spent the day, so there was swapping around at 5.30. The first week I moved in was a nightmare. We had creche meetings once a fortnight, and there’d be all these adults sitting round talking about a kid shitting on the floor. There were these problems. All the nappies would end up in the same place, or all the trousers, and there were never enough to go round.’The meetings were necessary for the survival of the creche, because of the complexities of organization, and to ensure a communal, concerned exchange of information about the children. ‘Childcare in general is not a boring thing, but the minute details of whether little Jane is eating an apple or not are very dull.’ The non-biological parents depended on the meetings for support. Their deep sense of responsibility for the children needed reassurance against cynical observations flung out by those who ‘feel they have an absolute right to barge in and criticize what you’re doing. People would never behave so crassly and insensitively to parents in a family set-up, or to unsupported mothers or to fostering/adopting parents. Because it’s an unusual structure they think you’re strange people who don’t have feelings.’Mothers who have had sole responsibility during their child’s early years, who have gone through the frightening discovery that mothering is not all instinctive, feeling bewildered, unsure and insecure, feel also a sense of achievement. Their strength flows from their relationship with the children. When this particular relationship to their children changes and the constancy of their children’s dependence begins to lose its hold, they can feel alone in a new anxiety. Their child’s affection might disappear. This is an undertow of dread which is hard to reveal to the non-biological parents and which, in the delicacy of creating trust between parents and non-parents, can institute itself as defensiveness. At the creche meetings, Moira was always ‘reticent’ about asking for special time with her child in her own house because her suggestion was interpreted as ‘possessiveness’, an ‘incorrect’ emotion, and met by a hurried reassurance that the other adults would be ‘nice’ to her child. The issue of her identity as a mother was ‘swept under the carpet’.On the other hand, there is the question of mothers expecting the women to take responsibility while at the same time denying them real control. When this is raised, mothers can evade it by deflecting the question back on to their feelings. Fran gave an example from her household: ‘Like over teatime, I think if I’m cooking the tea, it ought to be up to me to decide whether or not the kids can have sandwich beforehand, but when they go and ask their mother, she’ll say yes or no regardless of me making the tea. And she just seems to get defensive when she’s confronted about it, she just gets this guilty thing about “I’m a bad mother”.’The extreme of forcing relationships to fit into a newly ordained order within the collective is, however, uselessly destructive. At one point in Fran and Jodie’s household ‘We had agreed to abolish parenthood. James had been living with his mum for two years before that but if he called her mum someone would say “Her name is Rose”.’ Four years later Jodie comments wryly that they had ‘unrealistic expectations’. The mother’s practical experience of the child was rejected, and at times she had felt ‘put down just for being the mother’. When the mother and child remained emotionally dependent on each other, some of the other adults had felt rejected. They reacted by rejecting the child themselves and almost blaming the mother for the situation.Caroline’s experience of collective living in London has led her to the conclusion that the mother is always a central figure in collective households and the childless women peripheral. ‘The exigency the kids had was absolute, the two mothers had a great deal of power in the collective.’ She felt this was because the intense emotion and physical effort of childcare- despite a fairly even distribution of work between the parents and non-parents - was out of balance when control stayed with the parents: ‘In all the collectives I’ve known the parents have had the ultimate responsibility or pleasure.’ Her response has been to have a child of her own because, finally, it seemed impossible to disentangle the love and labour: ‘Childcare is a very fine, exciting and volatile mixture of love and housework.’Her desire was echoed by some of the other women confronted by the ultimatum of mother-right and the imminent department of children from their lives. ‘From my experience mothers just want someone to help them out and they don’t really want to give up control, and I feel now I would have to have kids myself to get that sort of relationship’ was the despair and defeat felt by Jodie. Wendy and Alison thought that ‘parents can treat their kids like shit but they’re still theirs.’ For Fran it was hard to live with the fear of loss: ‘Louise and the children are moving out to a co-op house, and this means that after years I am not going to be living with them any more, and last week I started getting really upset because I thought that when Louise no longer needs me to help out I won’t be seeing them any more.’... Jenny brought out the particular contrast between her job in a London council nursery and the oddity of being a non-biological parent in private life. ‘There I’m being paid as a nursery worker, the children go back to their parents in the evening and I don’t feel all those responsibilities. It’s a more clearly defined role as opposed to being this strange person who looks after other people’s kids.’ For her the comparison is heightened when parents press for help with their children and overlook the love; ‘It’s like saying children are just a burden. We wouldn’t say that about a sexual relationship. We choose all the time to get dependent. There are a lot of good, positive things about being a parent that people deny. Parents get a lot of emotional reward from having a child. When I am with Andy I feel my life is far more structured and real in the same way you do when you have a sexual relationship.’... The women who are non-biological parents feel like the governess of old- no one knows quite how to treat them. In seeking deeper understanding and clarification of their position, they are asking for recognition of their feelings as well as of their contribution to the work involved in childcare: ‘We do not want to load even more criticism on to already pressured mothers. What we are saying is that it is also difficult for childless people in our society, and that unless we all try to work out these conflicts and recognize each other’s difficulties, then successful collective childcare will never be a reality. The role of non­ parents needs to be more clearly defined both within the collective and in the outside world, and our rights, needs and emotions must be recognized as valid.’SR.66, January 1978       Leeds Animation Group SR.64, November 1977
Not So Much a Day NurseryDARTMOUTH PARK HILL, LONDON...As our society is structured at the present time, a mother is generally responsible for the daily activities of her child until the age of five. Many women feel isolated and frustrated in this situation: the only training we receive for this parental role is the experience of our own lives.Many mothers would like to work, others must for financial reasons - all are faced with the practical burden of arranging for suitable childcare. All are faced with the more intolerable emotional burden of guilt placed on them by a society which has built a myth around motherhood and dumped it on all women regardless of their individuality.The women’s liberation movement has long been aware of these problems and has recognized that the children available in this country does not fulfil the needs of most mothers. After much discussion and argument, the demand for free twenty-four hour nurseries for children from nought to five was formulated for the first women’s demonstration in March 1971. Twenty-four hours for women who had to work at night - nurses and cleaners, etc.This demand proved unrealistic and unworkable.On 30 March 1971, Camden Council in London held a meeting on Childcare, two members of the women’s liberation movement attended and complained about the existing childcare facilities in Camden. Following this meeting, two women were approached by the Director of Social Services and asked for positive suggestions as to how the problem might be tackled.With some reservations they agreed to discuss the position among themselves. Several meetings were held with members from twelve North London groups attending.At these meetings it was decided we would ask the council to:A: Supply us with twelve empty short-life houses in redevelopment areas.B: Renovate these houses.C: Give us a grant for one full-time worker and running costs for the house.We in return would.A: Organize and run twelve full-time nurseries.B: Supply free labour on a voluntary rota basis (in the belief that free: education is the right of every child.)We insisted that the nurseries should be free, and that we should have complete control and autonomy in the running of them, and of all activities connected with the nurseries.The group felt that the hours the nurseries were open must suit mothers who work full-time. We must be open at least from 8.30 to 6.00 p.m. We were also anxious that men should be involved, believing that childrearing is the responsibility of both men and women.The large group of women’s liberation members slowly dwindled to a small core. This group then became involved with local women not in the movement and a working group of seven was finally formed. This group negotiated with the council for eighteen long and disheartening months. How long can a pre-school child wait?On 11 May 1971 our proposals were accepted by the Director of Social Services and we started to look for suitable housing.We chose the Highgate New Town area primarily as it was local to most of us, and several in the group already had contact with the local community. The community was in flux: half the residents had been moved out during the redevelopment programme, and other homeless families moved in for short stays in condemned houses. So we particularly wanted our Centre to be a caring friendly place for people old and young.We searched the area and gave the council long lists of empty houses, many of which they did not know they owned.Eventually we agreed upon a house, No. 123 Dartmouth Park Hill. We drew up plans for the conversion and had many meetings with the council about money, organization, and just getting things started.At this time we realized that one of our greatest mistakes was never to get any of the council promises in-writing. This made it extremely difficult to put pressure on them as all dares and agreements were verbal - delay followed exasperating delay. Finally we became so frustrated that we wrote them a threatening letter saying that unless we were given a definite completion date we would demonstrate publicly and take our story to the media. The council outsmarted us by releasing their own press statement. However, as a result of our letter we got a completion date of 12 August, also a pledge published in the Daily Mail that we should be rehoused once our house was demolished.We got the keys in September and were shocked at the state in which the contractors had left the place. Foolishly, we had said we would do the decorating, hoping to get local people involved in this work, so that they would reaIIy feel that it was their Centre. The amount of work left for us to do was staggering, and as time was so short and everyone fed up we felt unable to ask for local help.There followed desperate weeks of carpentry, plumbing, plastering and painting.We also learnt at this stage that we would not be allowed to accommodate babies.This was a blow as we felt strongly that mothers of very young children desperately need a few hours to themselves during the week.More weeks of ordering, organizing and buying equipment followed. Finally, on 4 December 1972, we opened.The Centre is run in a four-storey house with a flat at the top occupied by a mother and child. We have discovered several good things about having a Centre for children in a house rather than a church hall or a purpose-built nursery school. First the children can relate to the size of the rooms and it is more like their own homes. Secondly it is flexible. We can change things around if we like, paint it how we (and the kids) want it, use it in the evenings and weekends and, what’s more, both of us - kids and grown-ups- feel that it’s OUR Centre, it doesn’t belong to the church or the education authority.We have separate rooms for different activities namely an art room (paint, clay, water-play, cutting and pasting), imaginative play room (house corner, dressing up, building materials), ‘quiet’ activities room and eating room (books, table toys), sleeping room and office.We were given £15,000 initially to equip the Centre throughout, and managed to get several things second-hand or free; and we get £3,000 a year running costs, to include salaries of the paid workers. We have one qualified full-time worker and one pan-time worker, both having experience with pre-school children, and a cleaner worker in the evenings, all of them having been chosen by us.There is a rota of people who work at the Centre, consisting of paid workers, parents who are able to give time and volunteers who do not have children at the Centre but who want to work there. We have actively encouraged men to work on the rota if they can and there are now four who do. We have found that they are capable of doing more than just mending the toys, but they have often felt unsure of themselves, and it’s been hard for them entering a world where, to date, women are a majority and have more experience.The children are being cared for by, and are learning from, a group of people, not just a single parent or teacher, in a stimulating and loving environment. This allows a much greater range of experiences and relationships for the child than the often stifling and exclusive mother-child bond, and enables us to care for our children together in a supportive situation where problems can be shared. It also means that we have more time of our own to work if we want or have to, and to develop ourselves in other ways. Both the children and the grown­ ups are benefiting from the collective care of our children.There is a journal written daily in which the events, progress and problems of the day are recorded, plus any other information or questions one wants to pass on to others. This means that parents who usually work at the Centre once a week can read it and find out what has been happening on other days. It is also very useful as a record of the children and the Centre, and we have been able to trace changes and developments since we began. Anyone who wants to can write in it, and writing in it makes you really think about what has happened.There are twenty-one children who come to the Centre, but only fifteen at any one time because of space limitations. Some are at the Centre all day, some only in the morning or the afternoon, and the age range is two to five years. Six of the children who come are those of the original organizers, but our priority now is to take children from the immediate neighbourhood.We are open from 8.30 until 6 p.m. to meet the needs of those parents who have full-time jobs and therefore cannot work on the rota. Some of the parents have part-time jobs and others work at home (housework and care of babies). Both of the latter are expected to work on the rota. There is always a wholesome meal midday, plus morning and afternoon snacks, and the younger children sleep in the afternoon if they want to.Many of us are trying to work out different ways of relating to children. We don’t want to be authorities always telling them what to do and commenting on whether they are good or bad. We want to recognize them as human beings and to treat them as such. There are many ways in which we have been attempting to turn these ideas into practice and to translate the theory into something more than words and hot air. We encourage the children to be independent and to do as much for themselves as they can and we have been continually surprised at how capable they are. The lunchtime procedure is a good example of this. They serve themselves from central bowls on the table, pour their own drinks (and wipe up the spills!), clear away their own dishes and collect their own dessert from the kitchen. In the beginning we all had to restrain ourselves from always doing things for them, although it may be quicker and cleaner to do so in the short term. It took a great deal of thought, trial and error before things ran anything like smoothly and we are still learning. We had to buy jugs that they could handle easily, bowls that they could see into, and we are trying to get child-size brooms that really work so that they can sweep up afterwards and not just ‘play’ at sweeping in the house corner.All the toys and most of the art materials are on open shelves at child height so that the kids can always help themselves to things they want to use and they are encouraged to put things back when they have finished with them. The basic activities mentioned earlier are always available, but in addition we plan special activities around a weekly theme, in order to increase the number of different experiences we can offer the children. Examples of themes include living things, colour, how things work, shape and size, the senses, printing, etc. Whenever possible we go out with the children to try and link what they experience at the Centre with the world outside. The same local park can illustrate colour one week and plants the next. Having a theme helps to bring continuity from one day to another and it also makes us feel more secure when we work at the Centre if we know there are activities planned. One day the kids painted the leaves of the runner beans we were groving in the yard, bright red and yellow, and were terrifically pleased with the result. A few weeks later they saw that the leaves died because the sun and air couldn’t get to them. They learnt something, but even so they will probably do it again!       Alison Fell, SR.36, June 1975Whenever possible we try to involve the children to everything that happens at the Centre. They help to shop for the food, they go to the launderette to do washing, they help in preparation of food (cutting up fruit, grating cheese, making rice pudding or jelly), they put out chairs and set the tables. It does not always run smoothly. They don’t always want to do it. But on the whole the respond to responsibility and appear to thrive on it. Grown-ups are always available to help them, to talk to them, to cuddle and love them, and very often they comfort and hug each other. They are encouraged to help and care for one another and to be aware of each other’s need. This can be done in many small but important ways, e.g. asking them to help each other on and off with coats, pointing out when another child is crying and asking them why they think she is crying, noticing when children are away and discussing where they might be. It isn’t happening overnight, but we do believe things are changing and the kids are growing more sensitive to one another and are better able to work together, asking each other for help rather than always asking the adults. Like the adults they are learning that things get easier when they are shared.We believe that girls and boys should have the same opportunities. We do not want the girls to be always in the house corner with the dolls preparing for motherhood while the boys are enjoying rough and rumble games in the yard. We interest the boys in doing traditionally female things like cooking and setting tables and encourage girls to hammer nails and saw wood, although no one is forced to do anything. We don’t want our children to be channelled into very rigid roles according to their sex, which would limit their choices now and continue to do so all their lives.One of the central problems of education is contact between home and school. In one sense, we have no problem - the workers are employed by the parents, and are hardly likely to exclude them. But how to relate what goes on in the Centre to what goes on in the home? The weekly Sunday meeting provides an essential link. As a rule, one or two children are discussed each week - people are notified beforehand, and the discussion only takes place if the parent or parents of the child are there.Here parents can voice any anxieties or suggestions they may have about their children- not, as it were, to a group of ‘professionals’, but to a group made up largely of other parents, who know their children and work with them, and whose children in turn are known to all. So discussion is based, not on asking the advice of experts, but on the exchange of experience and common problems. How does the child relate in other children in the Centre? Or to brothers, sisters or parents? What happens in the home or out shopping? Has the child changed since coming to the Centre, or do the other parents have difficulty in relating their behavior in the home?Not all parents are used to handling a lot of children at one, and many of us feel the need to discuss some of the problems we encounter. In the meeting there’s the opportunity to learn from each other as a group- from successes and failures - and of basing our learning on our practice, and vice versa.The meeting, in fact, is fundamental to the organization of the Centre. In a situation where most parents work, there is no other regular opportunity for all to get together. It’s not just a question of ‘participating’ in the running of the Centre - the parents run it, and the meeting is the place where the policies and daily routines are worked out.Subjects for discussion include children’s books, and the almost insoluble problem of finding ones which don’t cast children into the old stereotypes. Or aggression among the children: should they be left to fight it out, or should we intervene? And if so, at what stage? And what do the children expect of us? Or again, the problem of sex-roles: if a girl wants to do the washing up and help with the food, why shouldn’t she? But if she monopolizes these activities, will she be preventing a boy from learning? On other occasions we’ve used films i.e. other people’s ideas about childcare - to stimulate our own discussions.We don’t want to make it sound as if we don’t have problems: we do. There are personal and political differences between people, as in all groups, and we can’t claim that everyone in the neighbourhood look favourably on us. Many older residents, who were forced to bring up their children without free facilities of any kind, are understandably resentful.It’s not always easy for new parents coming into the Centre to realize that it’s not only their Centre, but their responsibility to run. In the meetings, some people talk a lot, and some hardly at all. It’s important that we’re sensitive to everyone, and don’t allow one group to dominate. Perhaps more important, however, is the inability or unwillingness of some parents to come to the meeting at all. We’ve argued a lot about this, but we’ve finally come to the conclusion that in an organization in which responsibilities should be shared by all, we should insist that parents come to at least one meeting a month.Transport, too, is a problem: several of us have vans or cars, but we regard outings as an essential part of the learning process, and we need to find ways of getting hold of the money for a mini-bus.We have had many discussions about publicizing the work and aims of the Centre. Some members of the group feel that work in this field diverts much-needed energies from the practical business of running the Centre. This is a very real problem, as all are pressed for time.Others feel that it is of vital importance that we make our information and experience available to others trying to organize in similar ways, and that we should try to spread our ideas in the hope of showing people what is possible.All feel, however, that any publicity given to the Centre should be controlled by us. Those in the women’s movement have good reason to be wary of the media. In general we try to relate our publicity to some activity.Naturally we did our best to make the opening known, particularly in the immediate neighbourhood, and on 5 March this year we held a press conference. The response from the members of the press who turned up was sympathetic.Later we held a public meeting for groups and individuals interested in setting up centres in their own areas. This meeting was very successful, and gave us all a great sense of solidarity and achievement. The opportunity to discuss the Centre with new interested people was especially rewarding and hopeful.A film is being made about the Centre with the object of showing it to people as a basis for discussion.We do not want to remain an isolated experiment, but to become part of a much wider movement of local collective action.SR.17, November 1973       Alison Fell, SR.36, June 1975
A Playgroup Called FreedomWOMEN FROM ARMAGHFor working-class women in Northern Ireland there is no escape from the presence of the British army, from the day-to-day struggle in the streets. No escape either from the drudgery of housework and childcare. Here a group of women from Armagh, a county town thirty-five miles south-west of Belfast, describe their fight to form a playgroup on their housing estate. The playgroup, which opens in December [1975], will be called’ Saorise’ - ‘Freedom’ in Irish.... At a cursory glance our estate appears ideal, surrounded by pleasant green fields with a river running close by. Closer inspection shows that it is far from ideal, and any of the women living here can testify to that.The estate is built on a very steep hill which should have been levelled - instead large concrete steps join one level to another. There are over 400 of these steps, not counting those at the front and back of houses, as many as thirty up to one house. Dangerous unfenced walls mask drops of up to fifteen feet in places. The one supermarket, very expensive, is situated in the middle of the estate. To reach it from the bottom you have to climb eighty-three feet. Picture that with a shopping bag, toddlers and perhaps a pram! Old age pensioners live in bungalows at the bottom of the estate; none of them have ever seen the shop. The estate is a mile and a half from the town centre; there is no bus service, and a taxi costs 35p.Most of the people living here are newly married, so the percentage of pre-school children is very high. The structural dangers are a constant nightmare to mothers continually ‘on guard’ with playing kids. The planners have erected a ‘play area’- we call it a death trap- which is totally unsuitable for any child under ten. It is built beside the only entrance to and exit from the estate, and the swings, slide and steel climbing frame have already claimed many pre-school victims, some of whom required hospitalization.With the constantly high male unemployment figures, Armagh like most towns has followed the traditional pattern with plenty of social outlets and meeting places for the men, like pubs and bookies, while the women stay at home, isolated, with nothing but the bingo, some pubs or the recently opened cinema.One woman who moved here from Belfast where she had been involved with other women called a few of us together one evening, primarily to talk about the problems we had living here. The major thing discussed was childcare. We came to realize that by running a nursery or playgroup on a co-operative basis we would not only be helping our kids but we’d be going a long way in alleviating some of our own problems. The question was where to hold it and how to finance it.A large community centre had been built on the estate in 1972, but had stood empty since then because no official body was prepared to take financial responsibility for opening and running it. It had cost £48,000. It’s around this centre that our fight has revolved. We decided that its minor hall was an ideal site for the playgroup, but the centre was not available to the community.The Unionist-dominated Armagh District Council has refused to take over responsibility for it, although under the Youth and Recreational Service Order Act (1973) N.I. they were entitled to. The council gave various excuses as to why they would not take it on- ‘Rise in rates’ or ‘If we give you a community centre, everyone will want one’. We think every estate like this should have one.The council’s decision is generally accepted as sectarian - the Unionist council discriminating against the anti-Unionist citizens by refusing them access to the community centre. A battle raged over this, but the Tenants’ Association and the Community Association soon bowed out of the fight.2In April 1975 the Housing Executive of Northern Ireland told the press they were going to brick up the centre in a bid to combat vandalism. But the Housing Executive had previously refused to spend money either to secure the building or to make it usable. For the older kids the centre had become a symbol of sectarianism. We have always maintained that if the place had been used from the start the vandalism would not have occurred.We decided to form a strong committee to combat the council. We called an emergency meeting of women interested in the nursery. At that meeting we decided to move in, clean up the place and take it over as it stood, in order to show the council and the Housing Executive that they would not get out of things so lightly. We issued a press statement laying the blame for the damage to the centre at the feet of Armagh District Council.In an effort to identify people in the area with what should be their community centre we organized a grocery sale in May this year, collecting groceries throughout the town and selling them for next to nothing. This was the first time the centre had been used. We made £75 for the playgroup and planned to start it as soon as possible, either by fixing up the minor hall ourselves or by squatting the first available house on the estate.All this time the Tenants’ Association did nothing except engage themselves in a smear campaign against the women, calling us Provies (members of the Provisional wing of the Irish Republican Army), troublemakers and lefties. The Tenants’ Association was dominated by Stickies (members of the official IRA) and we were exposing their inadequacy and ineffectiveness.3We’d all become aware that by directly associating us with a particular organization, in this case the Provisional IRA, they were really saying that as women we were not capable of doing all this ourselves­ there must be some men in the background pushing us. And these are people who call themselves socialists and talk of women’s rights.We kept on using the hall to raise funds, expose the council and pressurize everyone in authority. The Housing Executive didn’t even try to brick up the hall. We had women planted all over the estate in case they did, and the teenagers who helped us clean the place up kept an eye on it in case of further vandalism or moves from ‘above’ to close it.The weekly meetings went on. We were not restricted to playgroup matters, as we had come to be seen on the estate as the only group interested in or capable of solving people’s problems. The teenagers came to us for help, because with the daily sectarian assassinations - directed mostly against Catholics - they couldn’t leave the estate day or night and had nothing to do.We advised them to identify their own problems and think of ways to solve them, promising help when required. We thought it important that the teenagers learn to make decisions on their own. As kids continually kept down by authority figures at home and in school this was difficult, but things have smoothed themselves out.There is a youth committee which runs discos and games nights, with minimal help from the women. We were able to get some equipment from the Department of Education and when the weather is bad kids play in the centre. We also use it one night a week for a keep-fit class for women. This is popular and attracts women not just from this area but from all over the town.But the playgroup still needs a finished building and proper finance. Some people thought we should buy the centre ourselves but we didn’t agree that working-class people should have to pay for such facilities. So when local businessmen and the Chamber of Commerce organized a Civic Week Festival in May we decided to cash in on it to publicize our needs. We ‘invaded’ various displays and events, distributed leaflets and talked to people about the playgroup and community centre.At the end of the festival the Chairman of the District Council was to attend a Vintage Car Cavalcade in the centre of Armagh. We thought we would publicly embarrass him and the council by picketing with a banner we’d made: ‘Civic Pride, Civic Responsibility: Armagh District Council- We Need A Play Centre’. Like the centre of most towns in the North, the Mall in Armagh is considered Unionist territory. It’s of Georgian design with a well-kept green for playing cricket. The only women’s prison in Northern Ireland stands at one end and the court-house at the other. Some women were afraid to go on the picket but a few of us brazened it out.It was a frightening experience. We sneaked through the crowd into the middle of the road and unfurled the banner. This stopped the cavalcade for fifteen minutes, much to the annoyance of the crowd and the R U C (the Royal Ulster Constabulary, the predominantly Protestant police force in Northern Ireland), who couldn’t give us the usual ‘booting’ because of all the press and TV people around.We then went through the crowd giving out the leaflets. Most people refused even to take one, and some threatened us, calling us “Catholic bastards’. The sad thing was that some people there wouldn’t identify with our demand because of the sectarian block in their minds.The exercise was worthwhile for apart from all the TV coverage it proved to other women that when organized nothing is impossible for us.The government was forced to take an interest, and a stop-gap measure was found. The Department of Education agreed to pay for the damage to and renovation of the centre, and the Housing Executive agreed to lease the hall to the Community Association for six months.On 14 September we met some bigwigs (architects, ministries of this and that) and they agreed to renovate the minor hall first so that we can open the playgroup while the rest of the reconstruction is still going on. We put in our plans for small toilets, washbasins, etc., and we’ll now have a community centre with a purpose-built room for a nursery.... The project has started to break down the isolation felt acutely by women living in a family set-up on estates like this.SR.41, November 1975
South Oxford Nursery StaysOXFORD CITY NURSERY CAMPAIGN, NEWSHORTLast July a Council Working Party secretly decided to close South Oxford Nursery. The County Council Education Committee, consisting of country squires, antique dealers and led by Brigadier Streatfield, were delighted to save a measly £8,000 a year. ‘No babyminding on the rates!’ said the Brigadier. Since then, the class has had its waiting list closed and so last term only thirteen children remained. This is the only city centre nursery provision and the children came from all over Oxford - many from Asian, Egyptian, Spanish, Italian and Chilean families, where English is not the first language, and some from one­ parent families where the mother is out at work.We were all aware that here was a good state nursery class with potentially thirty full-time places, being closed for no reason. It was no substitute to be offered part-time places in other nurseries. At a meeting called by the Nursery Campaign, it was decided that the only thing to do was for the parents to occupy the building when they went to collect their children. The parents were acutely aware of their small numbers, language problems and lack of confidence to take such a radical action; nevertheless they went ahead and occupied the nursery. The occupation has since been successfully maintained with the support of the Nursery Campaign and other groups. The children have been involved throughout the occupation.Our campaign is not only concerned with the loss or reduction of nursery education for the children now at the school, but is fighting to save thirty full-time places for the city and to expand nursery provision. We are now running a happy and efficient nursery with trained staff. The trades council have given their support and public sector workers have refused to cut off our essential services... However, we are aware that unless public opinion both locally and nationally stays with us, the council will get a possession order from the courts. When they think we are an abandoned cause, no longer news-worthy, they will try to send in the bailiffs. It would be a bitter loss if all the energy, co-ordination and caring created through the occupation were to be wasted. Many of us have realized for the first time what can be achieved by taking action and fighting together for our rights. This action is of national importance as it is the first occupation of a nursery since the passing of the Criminal Trespass Law. It is vital for us to win this fight against particularly vicious education cuts.SR.70, May 1978
Oxford Nursery Plays OnOXFORD CITY NURSERY CAMPAIGN, NEWSHORTSouth Oxford Nursery... was evicted on 28 April, but is still going strong in a building just over the road. The council is now complacent that the ‘problem’ is solved, but with the violence of the eviction, people are angrier than ever and even more determined to show that they’re not finished.Oxford County Council took them to court on 27 April and got a possession order. Anne Marie Sweeney, one of the parents, explains: ‘We got a tip-off from the County Court that the bailiffs would come at seven the next morning, expecting no press or children. So we rang round the papers and got everyone there at 7 a.m.! It was full when the bailiffs arrived so they panicked and fled. The stupid fools came back at 11.30, right in the middle of a class - we had sixteen kids there, and some press still. We refused to open the door so they smashed it in, breaking flowerpots and really upsetting the kids. There were forty of them there - bailiffs, council officials, police - intimidating the kids, saying, “You’d better come with us or we’ll put you in jail.”‘We had to decide whether to resist and be carried out -	two Chilean parents were anxious not to because of the danger of being arrested, so we decided to leave together, singing.’ They went straight to the new premises they’d arranged - given them by the church.At the end of July the council plans to close a middle school in the same building as the nursery: ‘We see this as an attack on our whole community,’ says Anne Marie, ‘which just happens to be a prime development area.’...SR. 71, June 1978
New CrecheANGELA PHILLIPSFor a few parents in London, the dream of co-operatively controlled, cheap childcare has become a reality. The Kingsway Children’s Centre opened at the beginning of September for about thirty children, ranging from a few months to school age. The centre is the result of eighteen months of planning and organizing by a joint trade union committee initiated by the staff at the T U C.The centre is unique in several ways. For a start, it is (as far as we know) the only creche to be organized solely by employees of participating firms, independent of any particular management. Secondly, it is the first creche to be financially supported by a number of employers paying two thirds of each child’s place while the parents pay one third. The money is to be paid six months in advance, which gives the creche some financial stability.The creche management committee is made up of the staff, plus one member of each participating organization, irrespective of the number of places paid for. It is expected that representatives will be either from the trade unions involved or parents (preferably one and the same). Again, this ensures that no single organization gains control, and that preference for places will not always go to the larger firms.The cost of each place is £20 a week, of which parents pay £7. This price reflects the high staff ratio required for children under two years old. To make the cost reasonably economic for everyone, the number of really young babies will be kept at a proportion of nine to twenty-one.The staffing also reflects the thinking behind the project: both nursery nurses and nursery teachers have been employed, avoiding the failing of many council schemes which separate creche and nursery facilities, providing the former merely for care and the latter for education (usually part-time). At Kingsway, education is seen as part of the function, and the skills of the staff are expected to overlap. Payment will be on the higher teaching scale rather than the abysmally low rates for nursery nurses.Money to get the scheme going was raised in loans and grants from participating organizations. Camden Council provided a loan of £5,000. The luckiest find was the centre itself, a disused nursery attached to the Kingsway Mission in Holborn, a place conveniently close to work for all the parents involved the scheme. They have use of it rent free.The organization of childcare facilities requires planning and capital before it starts, as well as knowledge of all the regulations which govern the public care of children, and a real understanding of the needs of both children and parents. Kingsway proves that it is economically possible for even small firms to provide childcare facilities. It should provide a useful example for all those of us trying to negotiate with employers for creches.SR.64, November 1977EditorialSPARE RIB COLLECTIVE‘For most families these [childcare] services are not appropriate. If they are made available at public expense too readily they can all too easily be seen as the expression of a philosophy which preaches that parents may do what they like and it is the duty of the state to look after children... Increasing state intervention carries with it the risk of eroding the responsibilities of individual parents.’ Patrick Jenkin, Tory Social Services Secretary, laid Conservative policy for women firmly on the line in this speech to the National Children’s Bureau. Mothers (not parents) are the best people to care for children, he said, and they should stay at home full-time.... Telling women their place is ‘kitchen, children and church’ is meant to make us feel guilty about things that are not our fault. Whenever children suffer from cramped housing, no play space, overworked childminders, horrible schools, it’s mothers who are blamed. ‘Irresponsible parents should be fined and punished by law,’ said Manon Roe, a G LC councillor, at the Tory Pany Conference. She attacked ‘the women’s liberation philosophy’ as the root cause of the increase in juvenile crime and vandalism, because according to her it has ‘brainwashed’ us into being ashamed of looking after our children properly. It’s up to us to fight back against restrictions on our rights, and also to provide alternative propaganda to destroy the myth that feminists are uncaring child haters. Neither children nor women will gain if we’re forced to choose between being childless ‘career women’ or full-rime housewives.SR.88, November 1979
4	HOUSEWORKWomen’s labour in the home is taken for granted. It is not seen as work that should be paid for, but something that women will do automatically, ‘naturally’. Women who are thrown out of paid work are assumed to disappear back into the category of ‘housewives’. An unemployed man does not slip back into being a ‘househusband’. Yet housework is essential. It includes shopping, preparing meals, washing up, cleaning, washing clothes, ironing and mending, as well as emotional servicing. In 1970 - a decade ago- it was estimated by Chase Manhattan Bank in the USA that it would cost as much as $257 (about £ 100) a week to pay someone else for all the components of a housewife’s job.Housework is tied up with loving care and as such its frontiers are interminable. It is not measurable by conditions which have been laid down in paid work, like an eight-hour day. A loved family is a well­ fed, comfortable family. A husband gives some of his wage to his wife for shopping, but she works for him ‘for love’. Women compensate for low wages or for the effects of inflation by the amount of work they do at home- when school meals are cut it is the housewife who puts in extra time and makes economies to replace them.Men have power in the world which women do not have and it is harder for women to challenge men in the one-to-one relationship at home than when women are working together and can organize. But improvements in the position of women at work will not give women social equality with men unless the sexual division of labour between home and work is taken into account. Most women who work outside the home take on a dramatically increased work load. They have the ‘second shift’ of their domestic responsibilities in addition to their jobs. Alternatively, where a man’s work is located in the home, women are often involved but their work is identified as ‘helping out’ and not given independent status. In 1978 Spare Rib reported that an industrial tribunal had ruled that a woman’s book-keeping and telephone work for her husband’s business was ‘only an extension of her household duties’. But in the same year a doctor’s wife succeeded in winning her case that the work of wives in the doctor’s surgery should be paid.While housework remains the sole responsibility of women, its tasks stay tied to the motivation of guilt, and housewives feel they don’t have the right to any rest, peace or solitude. Persuading men to participate in housework often brings out male anxiety and the fear of being henpecked, as if housework represents all that is feminine. It also, however, brings out the amount of thought and planning which domestic work entails, as Jennifer Coates pointed out: ‘Teaching people, for instance, to buy food - to recognize signs of good and bad quality- is an exhausting process because it demands rationalizing and articulating a mass of perceptions that one is unaccustomed to talk about.’ (an early SR) But men’s help will not change the sexual allocation of work. For men to take on housework, mothering, care of the sick or disabled and the old, would be a fundamental shift of responsibility and transform the world as we know it.
History of the HousewifeCATHERINE HALL To be a housewife in fourteenth-century England meant something very different to what it does today, when it has been decisively separated from the productive and industrial sphere. It still involved domestic work and the care of children, and it was still unpaid: but for a large proportion of women it would also involve many other kinds of work besides - brewing, baking, looking after the poultry, and so on. Part of the reason for that was the fact that the family itself, both among the peasants and in the town, was a productive unit.The family means in this context father, mother, often unmarried brothers and sisters, possibly grandparents, children, servants and- in an urban situation - apprentices. In this family the labour power of each individual member is only a definite portion of the labour power of the family. Women were, therefore, themselves centrally related to production, and not only through their husbands. The pre-industrial family was a self-sufficient economic unit and consequently domestic work had a much wider definition than it does now. It might well involve brewing, dairy work, the care of poultry and pigs, the production of vegetables and fruit, the spinning of flax and wool and also medical care- nursing and doctoring. These areas were roughly defined as ‘women’s work’: but there is much more flexibility in the drawing of lines around women’s work and men’s work- work was done on the basis of task-orientation rather than by way of a rigid and formalized division of labour.There were some jobs which were always specifically connected with one sex. The higher manorial officers were always men and the dairymaid, for example, was always a woman. A thirteenth-century manual on ‘The Duties of Manorial Officers’ gives us an account of the dairymaid’s work:The dairymaid ought to be faithful and of good repute, and keep herself clean, and ought to know her business and all that belong to it. She ought not to allow any under-dairymaid or another to take or carry away milk, or butter, or cream, by which the cheese shall be less and the dairy impoverished. And she ought to know well how to make cheese and salt cheese, and she ought to save and keep the vessels of the dairy that it need not be necessary to buy new ones every year.The two most powerful medieval theories about women were the creations of the church and the aristocracy. The church’s view of women was heavily influenced by St Paul and saw women as the creation of the devil and as both inferior and evil. Marriage was an institution set up to contain the unavoidable sin of sexuality; as Our Lord put it in a vision to Margery Kempe, the fifteenth-century mystic, ‘for though the state of maidenhood be more perfect and more holy than the state of widowhood, and the state of widowhood more perfect than the state of wedlock, yet, daughter, I love thee as well as any maiden in the world.’ The aristocracy on the other hand developed the counter­ doctrine of the superiority of women. This was connected with the cult of the Virgin Mary, the adoration of the Virgin in Heaven and the lady on earth. Though the two theories were at different poles, in one sense both combined to give women another worldly role - they were seen as in no way central to political or economic life. This split between the wicked and the divine, the prostitute and the saint, represents an ideological split and projection by men which has recurred in many forms. Women provided either an explanation for evil or a haven of good. Neither view had much to do with reality. In Chretien de Troyes’ romance Lancelot, the hero gets into Queen Guinivere’s bedroom but Lancelot ‘holds her more dear than the relic of any saint’ and ‘when he leaves the room he bows and acts precisely as if he were before a shrine.’ Neither of these theories were taken at face value outside the Church and the aristocracy; but what was clearly already accepted was that women were secondary and inferior.Because of the need for their labour, women in the village were in a better position than aristocratic women, in the sense that they were involved in productive relations. What this means in fact is that they were free to be exploited in an equal way with men. The feudal economy was based on the ownership of land, which was the major source of power, by a relatively small number: the land was worked by both free and unfree peasants. Few received money wages - the unfree worked on the lord’s land in return for renting some of the lord’s land. Every peasant was subject to a lord and in a hierarchial society every lord was subject to another who was ultimately subject to the king. Supposedly there was a system of rights and obligations at each level but at the bottom of the ladder the obligations which the lord owed to the peasant were absolutely minimal whereas his rights were extensive.Peasant women were able to hold land though the normal assumption was that heads of households would be male - the position of widows in particular has long been recognized as of importance, both because of their longevity and their established rights. Manorial records, as Rodney Hilton has shown, do record a substantial number of women holding land -even as minors. It seems that unmarried women with holdings would usually quickly marry- the labour of the man was as important to the woman as vice versa. However, their right to hold land was only because the holdings were small and would not affect the distribution of power on the feudal estate. Aristocratic women, with few expectations, could not hold land since land was the key to the feudal economy and once the property rights of a family or aristocratic line came into question women were simply a marriageable commodity. It is clear that peasant women did do heavy work on the land as can be seen from the illustrations of clod breaking and there is evidence that at some points they got equal pay. The question as to whether women labourers were paid the same as their male counterparts seems to have something to do with job definition and bargaining power. Female domestic servants were low paid, for example, because they were subject to non-economic compulsion since they tended to live in the lord’s household and could have all kinds of personal pressure put on them. But it would be wrong to associate the respect given to women’s labour with a society free from discrimination. Distinctions were of course made in the Iaw, education, the Church and in political and property rights between men and women. Peasant women could not assume the limited rights to property which men had - their rights were much less clear and would probably depend on the customs of a particular locality.Women were, furthermore, subject to particular kinds of exploitation by the feudal lord. At Pattingham in Staffordshire in April 1369, Juliana, the daughter of Roger Baroun, was ‘deflowered’ by aWelshman and had to pay a five-shilling fine to the lord of the manor. A woman who was not a virgin had less monetary value to her feudal lord since a well-to-do peasant might refuse to marry her and consequently the cut of the marriage settlement which the lord got would be less. In 1388 Agnes, the daughter of Juliana Prynce, had to pay ten shillings to the lord of the manor to be able to marry and go as a free woman with her goods.But abstract theories about the proper role of women were not allowed to stand in the way of meeting familial and social needs. Peasant women were able to play a relatively independent role in day-to-day economic life they were open to the same kind of exploitation by the feudal lord as were men whereas at other times the appropriation of women’s labour has been effected in a more indirect way. This means that women were likely to organize themselves politically in the same way as men. In Halesowen in Worcestershire in 1386, ‘A certain John atte Lythc and Thomas Puttewey, serfs, by the advice, procurement and maintenance of a certain Agnes, wife of John Saddler, assembled an illegal conventicle of unknown rebels against the abbot... saying openly that they did not wish any more to be considered as serfs of the abbot and would not do any of the previously owed services.’The social, political and ideological dominance of the male was clear, however, at the local level. Women were not the heads of tithings, they didn’t sit on local juries, they didn’t fill the office of constable or reeve. Women with a legal title to a holding could often be obliged to marry and they had to suffer a regular barrage from the Church about their evil influence. Women played a variety of economic role within the village- they were not all housewives and housewife had a much wider definition than it does now. They were not all housewives because there was a much smaller number of households to the population and there might be several women living in a household whose jobs were as domestic servants or labourers. Peasant women might, according to their age and marital status, be doing a variety of different jobs. They might be doing specifically women’s work, such as spinning and carding or in the dairy; they might be doing work which was not rigidly defined as men’s or women’s - in the fields - ploughing or harvesting; they might be working centred around their own household- cooking, brewery and caring for children- or as domestic servants either in the lord’s house or in the house of a richer peasant.‘Housewife’ in fourteenth-century England tended to mean the coordinator and organizer of an establishment and of a centre of production. The condition of being wedded to a house was a more substantive one than it is now because the fourteenth-century house had a different function and meaning from the twentieth -century equivalent. It did imply a status which was, however, considerably limited by the current ideology on the position of women. This reminds us that the ideological forms do not merely reflect the economic but have a life and relative autonomy of their own which can even serve in certain instances to limit and restrict the economic sphere. The economic and ideological demands on women in the village were to a considerable degree in contradiction to each other.The situation was very similar in the towns- being a housewife was recognized as a particular job but it involved a wide range of domestic activity. Generally there were no frontiers between professional or business life and private life. These activities all tended to go on in the same living/working area. The household was the centre both of domestic activity and mercantile activity. This integration of work and home contributed to the fact that it was not necessary to regard the socialization of children as one of the most important functions of the family. Children were not seen as a special group- once they were past infancy they were absorbed into the adult household and were educated by the process of life and work going on around them. Domestic service and apprenticeship were two of the major ways of educating and these applied to boys and girls alike (though the evidence as to girls being formally apprenticed is unclear, they certainly were apprenticed and trained informally).In a feudal society the notion of service was central to the relations between lord and master, parents and children, lover and mistress. Transmission of a way of life from one generation to another was ensured by the everyday participation of children in adult life. In the towns, as in the villages, women were engaged in a wide range of economic activities connected with the family as a unit of production. Women figure in guild records as barbers, furriers, carpenters, saddlers, joiners, and in many other trades. There are relatively few trades which explicitly exclude women. All the female members of a merchant’s household would be engaged in some form of economic activity - the housewife herself might spend a good deal of her energies organizing other men and women to fulfil the necessary domestic tasks so that she would be free to engage in mercantile activities. Women in smaller scale households might take up one of the entrepreneurial activities which were often associated with women because they were extensions of domestic activity - Margery Kempe who was the daughter of one of Lynn’s leading citizens describes how ‘she now bethought herself a new ‘housewifery’ and went in for milling. This was after the failure of her brewing enterprise which she ascribes to God’s disapproval of her involvement in such activities:Then for pure covetousness, and to maintain her pride, she began to brew, and was one of the greatest brewers in the town of N. for 3 years or 4, till she lost much money… For, though she had ever such good servants, cunning in brewing, yet it would never succeed with them.But the degree to which it was considered the duty of the good wife to look after her husband should not be underestimated. The Goodman of Paris, a late fourteenth-century text, instructs the wife:Wherefore love your husband’s person carefully, and I pray you keep him in clean linen, for that is your business, and because the trouble and care of outside affairs lieth with men, so must husbands take heed, and go and come, and journey hither and thither, in rain and wind, in snow and hail, now drenched, now dry, now sweating, now shivering, ill-fed, ill-lodged, ill-warmed and ill-bedded. And naught harmeth him, because he is upheld by the hope that he hath of the care which his wife will take of him on his return, and of the ease, the joys and the pleasures which she will do him, or cause to be done to him, in her presence, to be unshod before a good fire, to have his feet washed and fresh shoes and hose, to be given good food and drink, to be well served and well looked after, well bedded in white sheets and nightcaps, well covered with good furs, and assuaged with other joys and desports, privities, loves and secrets whereof I am silent. And the next day fresh shirts and garments... Wherefore, dear sister, I beseech you thus to bewitch and bewitch again your husband that shall be, and beware of roofless house and of smoky fire, and scold him not, but be unto him gentle and amiable and peacable. Have a care that in winter he have a good fire and smokeless and let him rest well and be well covered between your breasts, and thus be with him ... And thus shall you preserve and keep your husband from all discomforts and give him all the comforts whereof you can bethink you, and serve him and have him served in your house, and you shall look to him for outside things, for if he be good he will take even more pains and labour therein than you wish, and by doing what I have said, you will cause ever to miss you and have has heart with you and your loving science and he will shun all other houses, all other women, all other services and households.... In the fourteenth century, the Church provided the ideology of feudalism it deified hierarchical relations. With the crisis in the Catholic Church, the Reformation and the development of Puritanism, the Anglican Church no longer combined within itself religious, educational and cultural functions. Consequently the family became much more formative in the socialization of children. As a prayer in the primer of 1553 put it, ‘To have children and servants is thy blessing, O Lord, but not to order them according to thy word deserveth thy dreadful curse.’ The woman’s role in this was limited. She was her husband’s lieutenant and ultimately he made all the decisions of importance in most households.Meanwhile the wives of the bourgeoisie were becoming less and less involved in domestic and productive activities, and increasingly the desired image was that of the lady of leisure. Housewifrey seems to continue to be a valued skill amongst families of middling status where the labour of the woman was still needed. For those who can afford it, however, the ideal is the old, aristocratic one of passivity and dependence- a living demonstration of the wealth of the husband or father. Whereas in the medieval village at least women had a crucial economic function which was recognized, by the seventeenth century women are deprived both economically and ideologically as secondary - as people who care for and support others rather than themselves being active in the world. There is less tension between the economic and the ideological spheres than there was in pre-capitalist society because the woman’s two main economic functions have become firstly, the organization of a household which is no longer the central unit of production, and secondly, the provision of a cheap supply of labour.... In the nineteenth century the pattern established in the seventeenth century with the development of the capitalist mode of production was strengthened and extended with the formation of industrial capitalism. As the division of labour becomes more refined and job specialization increased so the sexual division of labour rigidifies. The bourgeoisie make their wives into ladies in a position of complete dependence economically and complete subordination ideologically and then use lower-middle-class and working-class women to service their households and produce their textiles.The emergence of monopoly capitalism has not fundamentally altered the sexual division of labour. Two of the main functions of women with twentieth-century capitalism could be described as the provision of unpaid labour in the home and the provision of a reserve labour force which is predominantly unskilled and low paid.... Women buy packaged foods and consumer durables thus cutting down considerably on the time taken in running a house but also providing an ever-expanding market. But, however many gadgets and aids exist, housework can in no sense be abolished without fundamental social change, and women still work extremely long hours in the home.SR.26, August 1974
Memories of My Mother-in-LawMERLIN CLARKEMy mother-in- law was born in August 1909 at Plaistow when Edward VII was king. She was the second child in a family of four children, three sisters and the youngest child a brother.She was brought up in a three-bedroomed house together with her paternal grandparents. She considers she had an extremely happy and settled childhood, due partly to the fact that her father had regular employment as a clerk in Henley’s Cable factory in Woolwich. To get to work he travelled a 2d tram journey (4d return) but would always walk the first part of the way as to tram this as well would have cost him another 1d (2d return). His hours were 9-5.30 p.m. Mon-Fri and 9-12 noon Sat. His wages were £2 per week and his father received 5s pension from Tate & Lyle, 5s OAP and his mother also received a 5s OAP. Her father’s job was a non-union one and she has no recollections of him ever being on strike.Another strong influence in the stability of her upbringing was the upbringing was the unquestioning respect of parents and the Church. Her father never swore at the children or ever hit them, he never rowed or shouted with her mother, at least not in front of the children. The grandparents, on the other hand, did argue and this was very upsetting, also the drunken fights of a few neighbours.The furniture of her house was much as of the time. The parlour had a piano, a mahogany table, lino and mats and a low, open fireplace with fire irons. The kitchen had a scrub-top table, wooden chairs (her father’s chair was the holy of holies), rag rugs and a large kitchen range for cooking on. Lighting in the kitchen was by an oil lamp which was attached to the ceiling and went up and down. Her mother would turn the oil lamp off in the winter to save the oil and they would all sit in the firelight, singing songs and hymns until her father came home when the lamp would be relit. The parlour was lit by a portable oil lamp which her parents sometimes used in their bedroom, but normally it was candles for the bedroom.At mealtimes, as far as possible, all the family sat down to a meal together, but as children they were not allowed to talk whilst eating and they were certainly not allowed to ‘get down’ until everyone had finished. A typical breakfast would be porridge and toast, with sandwiches taken to school for lunch. She thought nothing of having jam or mashed potato sandwiches. If they did come home for lunch for some reason they would have jacket potatoes. Tea would be bread and jam and often bread pudding. Her mother, more often than not, would have a pot of broth on the range in the winter made from a marrow bone and split peas. During the 1914-18 war, margarine and butter were unavailable at one point and she remembers having bread and lard with salt and pepper. Whilst she does remember having meat, eggs, bacon and cheese, they were obviously less in evidence than the starchy, filling foods. The family kept chickens for meat and eggs during 1914-18.There was the usual comer shop and it was the children’s job to run errands. A cup would be taken for a pennyworth of mustard pickle, beetroot jam, or the like. Her mother always bought tea in ¼ lb bags. Normally they all ate margarine but with 2 oz butter for father. If any of the children were ill, he would nurse them while he ate and feed them titbits off his plate. During the 1914-18 war you had to register where you would buy your groceries and the children would take it in turn to queue early, then their mother would come and take their place and whichever child it was would run off to school. During Christmas week the stalls in the markets would be left up decorated and you could buy oranges, forty for 1s. Presumably oranges couldn’t have been so available during the war.Washing and cleaning in the home really were heavenly chores. To do the washing you first had to save everything that would burn to stoke up the stove and copper, or the stove and cast-iron copper. My mother­ in-law remembers that her mother was friendly with the owners of the corner shop who would give her wood in the shape of boxes. Once you had your fuel, you had to fill your copper by hand and when the water was hot you ladled it out into a tin bath when you would use a rubbing board and blocks of soap. Once all the washing had been rubbed it went back into the refilled copper together with bleaching soda and ordinary soda and would be left to boil for twenty minutes. It was a steamy job, pushing it down every so often with a copper stick. As the children went out to work and there was a little more money, her mother would use Hudson’s Soap Powder instead of the two sorts of soda. When the wash had finished boiling it would be lifted out into a bath of clean water to be rinsed, all ‘whites’ would be ‘blued’ with a Reckitts blue bag, or starched, and finally it would all be wrung out through a hand-operated mangle. After the wash had been dried it would be ironed on the kitchen table on an old piece of blanket with a sheet or piece of cotton over that. The irons would be hot irons heated by the fire and the only sure way to see if they were hot enough would be to spit on them. In 1923, her mother had to have an operation for breast cancer and a neighbour, whose husband was a dock worker, and more often than not, was not chosen to work, came in and did all the washing, not the ironing, for 2s 6d. The neighbour came at 8 a.m. and left at 1 p.m. and would only stop for a glass of beer and bread and cheese half -way through the morning. Apparently this neighbour also took in washing and thought nothing of pawning the clean laundry on Tuesday until payday. My mother-in-law only ever went into a pawn shop once and she had such a telling off from her mother that she was too frightened ever to go again, even though she had only gone with a friend. The hearth had to be hearthstoned and blackleaded, the fenders rubbed with Brasso. The step and sills would be rubbed with a donkey stone. Lace curtains starched and pulled.Children started school much earlier then than now, it seems. My mother-in-law started school at four and a half, but her elder sister started at three. There were forty-five to fifty pupils in a class and lessons were done on a slate with a slate pencil. The poor children would go to school early at 8 a.m. and have a breakfast of porridge and bread and margarine, but for them to receive this their parents would have to have undergone a means test and to have sold any furniture or goods that weren’t really essential to living. The receiving officer would then issue five tickers for breakfasts for a week. She has no memories of school lunches. She was taught the three Rs and also how to knit. When you became an older pupil you were taken swimming. If, as a pupil, you became ‘high’ in the hot weather, the teacher would arrange to take you to the public baths where you had a free bath and you became socially more acceptable. It was only the neglected children who had to suffer this fate. To have a bath at home, the copper ritual would have to start all over again, the tin bath would be placed on two kitchen chairs in front of the fire, the eldest child had the cleanest water being the water being topped up down to the youngest.       SR.2, August 1972For clothes the girls always wore a white pinafore over a thick winter dress or in the summer a calico dress. Under this would be either a flannelette or calico petticoat, flannel stays, Iiberty bodice, a vest and calico drawers. In winter this would be topped off with a coat and knitted hat. Her mother made all of their clothes but after the eldest it was all hand-me-downs. As they all wore button boots, the girls always fought as to who would have the button hook first. Straight hair was curled in ‘rag crackers’ for special occasions and as most Sunday School parties were on a Friday evening you had to present a note at school asking permission to keep your ‘rags’ in during the day.…If you needed a doctor but had no money you went to the relieving office doctor and then received any medicine you needed off him. Her brother once had an abcess in his groin and the doctor charged 1s for calling, and then lanced the abcess while her brother was on the kitchen table. A milkman called and he took a measure from his can and ladled it into your own jug. The baker also came, and weighed each loaf on a pair of scales before he sold it to you as, if it was under weight, you had a make-weight piece.Her few recollections of the 1914-18 war include remembering brown paper stuck to the windows as black out and sitting under the kitchen table for a shelter.Whilst I think she had remembered fairly accurately and not made things seem too rosy, I do wonder what her father’s working hours were as they seem much too short compared to other workers of the time.Another reason for their completeness as a family may have been that her mother was half German and may have been subject to ill­feeling from neighbours, and if they kept themselves to themselves perhaps they fell more secure.SR.29, November 1974
Daffodils, Cards - and WagesJILL NICHOLLS‘All of us are housewives and mothers- we do the work of mothering other people. We’re tired of doing it for free.’ Suzie Fleming of Bristol Wages for Housework Campaign was addressing about one hundred women and a BBC camera crew in London’s Gate Cinema on 20 March, Mother’s Day. We’d all come in free, and been given a daffodil each.‘Few of us can get time off even on Mother’s Day. We appreciate the cards and the flowers but they’re just not enough- we want a wage for our work,’ she went on, showing a stack of petitions for a higher family allowance and wages for housework which were taken to Mr Healey at the end of the afternoon. Then the cameras went away and there were songs and their film About Time.We’d have some money and some wages tooAin’t it amazing what wages do...The speeches that followed referred to the Iceland strike, where women withdrew their labour for one day with the slogan ‘When women stop, everything stops’, and explained the campaign’s position: all women are housewives- gay and straight, black and white, married, single, prostitute- and all women’s work is essentially housework; as housework is a labour of love, so all women’s work is low paid and low status. If housewives were paid by the state they’d have higher status and more bargaining power - they could refuse their work.... The assumption was that no woman would choose to live with a man if she could afford not to. Assuming that, Wages for Housework means money for women so they can live apart from men, bring up their children in their own homes and not have to do jobs they don’t like (the assumption being that women go out to work only for money; given the chance they’d stay home).       CAZ, SR.4, October 1972That’s what speakers at the meeting implied, but it can come across rather differently – ‘We appreciate the cards, the flowers, the love, but we want the money too.’ This need not challenge woman’s role as wife, housewife and mother, or the way housework is organized. Wages for Housework campaigners do question the idea that housework and childcare are ‘naturally’ woman’s work, and that the family is the best place for them - they see a wage as the way to start changing this. But they sometimes suggest that if the economics change, the rest will follow and don’t face up to the way Wages for Housework can be used by people who don’t want women’s situation to change.A Finnish nursery worker, at the meeting with three Swedish women, had a familiar left-feminist reaction against the idea: ‘I am amazed that you are campaigning for women to stay at home. In Sweden where I live, the right -wing government is trying to get women to accept money to do that. In the crisis they want the men to have the jobs. The women’s liberation movement is united against this. It’s the last thing women want. It’s a way of keeping us out of society. You have to have the right to have a job. The right wing is saying that women are only fit to look after a family.’...SR.58, May 1977
‘Our Food Co-op Knows the Best Place’ALISON FELL AND JILL NICHOLL SIn the last months of 1973 one of the prime problems of living, for everyone, was rising food prices. It was hard to combat this in any practical way, let alone to attack the causes of the inflation. By Christmas people felt angrier and yet even more powerless than before. It was around then that a group of active women from East London decided that a food co-op might be one way women could organize together about something which affected them so basically. A few were women from a political group- East London Big Flame. The others were housewives and working women from Lincoln Estate in Bow. Together they visited the ‘Red Market’, a kind of co-op which had been operating with some success on a West London estate, discussed this, and set about writing a leaflet which local children helped distribute around Lincoln Estate. Although the shopping amenities there are meagre- only two corner shops, and those expensive, and the nearest market a 1 ½ -mile walk away - the first leaflet brought no response.‘I got a leaflet through my door, the first time I read it but took no notice, the second time I said I’m going to find out what it is, and ever since then I’m in the food co-op.’However the women took a risk and decided to buy more food than they needed for themselves. They set up a table in front of the estate and sold the surplus.‘I was coming back from shopping and there was a stall and some women over on the green by some of the flats and one of them approached me about the food co-op and asked me if I was interested, and asked me to go and have a look at some of the things they had on display, and I was very impressed. I’ve been going to the food co-op ever since. I find it make a vast difference in my money.’The food co-op began to attract interest and support from other tenants. However, the local shopkeepers, threatening to contact the G L C and tell them that the women were selling on their property, sent the police round. Because of this harassment the women stopped selling on the green and restricted their buying to the needs of those already in the food co-op and sharing in its work. ‘We started sharing the food out at someone’s flat, different every fortnight. But it was chaotic with nine or ten people trying to pick up their orders in someone else’s sitting room.’They had approached the local tenants’ committee for use of the tenants’ hall but the committee wouldn’t hear of it being used for food distribution. Luckily a woman living nearby in short-life housing over a semi-derelict shop offered the use of the shopfront, and it’s here that food is stored now, and orders shared out on Saturday mornings.So how does it work? The main organizing and allotting of tasks is done at a fortnightly Wednesday meeting. Order forms are given out and prices discussed; everyone decides what they need for the week, fills out an order form and puts enough cash in the float to cover their order- if they have the lump sum, otherwise they pay when collecting their order. The women organized a jumble sale to provide a cash float to start them off, foreseeing that some people might be too hard up midweek to lay out large sums for advance buying. Up to £100 is handled even week. When it came to finding out where to buy cheaply and in bulk the women drew on their own experience of bargain hunting, and that of friends and relatives who had lived in the area for a long time.‘At first people didn’t want to share their special knowledge because they thought it made them better shopper, than the others. But gradually we shared everything we knew about the best places to buy things so that we could all benefit and we found out the best places to buy food wholesale. Now, instead of “I know the best place” it’s “Our food co-op knows the best place.” individual fads about certain brands – “I only use Heinz Baked Beans, I wouldn’t touch anything else, I’m funny that way” - tended to lose their importance as the collective effort became more absorbing. Now people mostly trust the choice of whoever does the shopping.’There are three places the women buy their stock. On Thursday mornings two women drive to Wapping warehouse, which takes in supermarket tinned goods with damaged wrappers. On Fridays the eggs, potatoes and apples, which come straight from a farm, are picked up. Also on Friday, two other women visit the Cashmart where they buy all their basic groceries, meat and household goods like toothpaste, bleach, toilet rolls. On Friday evening two people go through all the bulk-bought goods using the order forms and pack each order into a separate box. Meat is wrapped, priced and kept in someone’s freezer overnight.‘It takes two to three hours, but it’s much more enjoyable than shopping, you have a bit of a natter with whoever’s doing it. It’s not just walking into a shop and getting served.’From 10 o’clock on Saturday mornings the shop fills up with people collecting their orders, buying extras from what’s left over, perhaps, and checking out the bills. Children play among the tins and boxes. This is one of the few times that men appear on the scene- some husbands pick up their wives’ orders but none are directly involved in organizing apart from a couple of the Big Flame men who sometimes help with the driving. Accounts like other tasks are shared as far as possible.‘It may be more efficient keeping the same jobs but it’s more fun taking it in turns going to the different places, otherwise it gets to be humdrum, a chore.‘It’s been slow to get the jobs shared out equally, only some of the Big Flame women can drive and though we’ve planned to teach people to drive we’ve not got round to it yet.’But the major problems of organizing such a self-help project have mainly been solved and the People’s Food Co-op has kept going where others have folded either from lack of a committed enough group to keep them running, or the absence of real material need among the members.Apart from the material advantage of cheaper food and the satisfaction to be gained from bypassing some of the middle men in the food distribution racket, the food co-op attracted members for other, more social reasons. The labour connected with feeding the family is usually a lonely, never-ending chore, a matter of tramping round supermarkets getting a stuffy head and bleary eyes, a matter of scrabbling through magazines for recipes which might prove your worth to... whom? Yourself, neighbours, husband, kids? These lonely battles for self­ respect are not easy for women to win. When these tasks are done communally, they still amount to hard work, but it’s sociable work. The women who joined wanted more than cheap food, they wanted to get out of the house, to make friends. Isolation bred suspicion - some were afraid to speak to neighbours in the lifts in case they were criticized for being unmarried mothers; some were so apprehensive about anything new that they answered through the letterbox when the first leafletters came round. They aren’t scared any more. A shared project of their own and opportunities for discussing everything under the sun have opened them up.The energy generated by the food co-op has carried over into other areas- there’s a Tuesday afternoon playgroup for the kids and a talk group for the mothers, which has lasted, while a babysitting scheme failed. A small self-help therapy group set up by women in Big Flame meets fortnightly.But they feel that the food co-op itself could do more, could expand and cater for more people than it does at present. They are making another attempt to get the tenants’ hall in order to open out the Wednesday meetings so that women who might have felt that the food co-op was exclusive to a group of friends would find it easier to join in and draw on its resources. Certainly for the ten or so women who have been deeply and consistently involved since the co-op began eighteen months ago, the benefits of this kind of organizing have been tangible and many sided.‘I’d like to live more communally next. You get energy off others. You can’t do it alone.’SR.40, October 1975       Alison Fell, SR.57, April 1977
His and Her HouseworkWENDY WHITFIELD... A year at college, in a very free environment, clearly underlined my marriage’s restrictions on my activities and relationships. I was torn between the two worlds of continuing with my studying and self­development and coping with my domestic responsibilities- washing, shopping, cooking, being home every evening and weekend with my husband. Back in a nine-to-five job, this dilemma was exacerbated. My studying was replaced by unrewarding labour and the same old chores.I’d been reading a lot of women’s literature - The Female Eunuch, Wedlocked Women, Spare Rib and the like. We were both becoming involved in left-wing politics. I participated in a strike at my place of work. So it seemed quite natural that I should pursue a course of industrial action in my domestic situation, where I was working long hours while the Boss read or watched the telly.After the usual nagging, the disguised and undisguised gibes, I decided on an all-out fight. All or nothing. I went on strike. I announced that from now on I would do only my shopping, cooking and cleaning. I would not clean up, nor would I keep up my incessant tidying, writing lists, washing and returning milk bottles, putting away the dishes that he left to drain instead of drying them, defrosting the fridge or cleaning the cooker, clearing away the coffee cups or writing to his relatives. In short, I would do no more than a man would do. Dave thought I was joking.After a few days it ceased to be funny. The battle began in earnest. His reactions and behaviour immediately fell into a recognizable pattern. At first I was treated with humour and affection. Then I was gently admonished, and then firmly dealt with, like a naughty child. When this failed - well, he’d done all a reasonable man could be expected to do, so I’d be left to ‘get out of it’ by myself.At this stage, it is important that personalities be kept out of the dispute: all discussion must be based on the assumption that marriage in a capitalist society inevitably produces a conflict of interests, and that it is in the interests of both partners to fight this. We as women must not be afraid to keep bringing up the subject and forcing our partners to reason through their objections. It is up to us to remember that men are conditioned to expect servicing, and even if they acknowledge equality in theory, they will relax all too soon into the role society prepares them for. I learnt that the same applies to us, and I had to reappraise my own attitude to my role. Was it really necessary to keep dusting and cleaning? Wasn’t it enough to wait until it really looked untidy? Together, we had to work out a common definition of ‘dirty’ and ‘untidy’. I’ve read that men camp. Certainly, Dave’s standards, like most men’s had been lower than mine; now I was expecting him not only to keep a reasonable standard, but to emulate the unreasonably high standards set out in magazines and on television.Eventually Dave was forced to start negotiating, in his own interest. Luckily we both liked each other enough not to take the easy way out and walk out. I suggested a rota, as the only way of reminding him of his commitments. This led to a bid to humiliate me: according to him, the degradation was mine for making such a suggestion not his for forgetting to wash his own underpants.Then there were his attempts to bring in support from outside- in the form of friends and, more deadly, the in-laws. This proved a very successful tactic on his part: I’d be lying if I said I didn’t have my own doubts about the struggle. Their shock, dismay and disapproval increased these doubts, but I gained fresh strength when I was accused of not being able to love my husband. This sounded all too familiar. Hadn’t my psychiatrist persuaded me to ignore my own feelings rather than question the status quo? Why do women have to humiliate themselves in this way to prove their love? Why can’t we enjoy loving our partners? Isn’t it humiliating that men expect this kind of ‘devotion’ and wouldn’t I have left Dave if I didn’t love him? All the same, relatives proved to be the deadliest of ‘enemies’. And I haven’t sorted that one out yet.It was finally agreed that the major chores were to be done in turns. The first stage was won. It worked well at first, but then Dave slipped into a decline again. He developed certain ‘last stands’. He absolutely refused (and still does) to clean the loo. I tried all tactics, ranging from asking cajoling, joking, teasing to bullying and humiliating. None worked. I have shelved that one for the time being. Maybe I’II have to compromise.When it came to washing, Dave worked to rule. He never realized the need for tackling the dirty socks under the bed, or the occasional washing like curtains and dressing gowns. I resorted to noticing them for him by popping them into the linen basket at the last moment. Tiresome though it is to do his thinking for him, he’s beginning to get the message, and is starting to develop a little professional pride. Similarly, he pretended not to understand the process of sorting our colours. After a few of my pale things had been ruined, I had to start teaching him. He never minded if his handkerchiefs were the colour of his Levis.All this pretence at ignorance, I found, is exercise in defiance. Men can’t really be that stupid. He not only succeeded in making me feel like a tyrant, but also failed to lighten my load, as I had to think about his turn as well as mine. The only way to tackle this obtuseness is to discuss it. Don’t be afraid to ‘keep bringing it up’. That’s all part of the same trick - treating it all as a joke and ignoring the problem.When Dave saw he really looked like ‘losing’, he played his best card. He waited until the traditional time for family drama, Christmas. With the extra workload brought by visiting relatives, his share increased somewhat. Well, he left his chores right until Christmas Eve. There he was cleaning the stairs until three in the morning. What he found to do for two and a half hours I’ll never know. I think it was to make me feel guilty, as there was a regular chorus of curses going on. But I’d learnt that the best way not to feel guilty was to go out, and so I did.Next day I regretted it. The in-laws settled down round a cosy fire. Cheer and goodwill? Treason. Judas with barely concealed delight told his mother that he’d been cleaning the stairs. On Christmas Eve. For two and a half hours.I again considered throwing in the towel. Did he really want me on his terms or not at all? It was a cold New Year.When I decided to work part-time in order to continue with my studies, I very nearly lost all the ground we’d made. With the novelty of having more time to myself at home, I indulged in orgies of house­ work, intending always to start studying ‘tomorrow’. Dave was delighted. It wouldn’t be long before he was enjoying my domestic services again. By the time I came to my senses and realized that I should be separating my domestic and studying activities, the rot had set in. It took quite a while to realize that studying at home involves considerable disadvantages, especially if you are a woman. It is all too easy to fritter away the best hours of the day shopping and cleaning. It took longer for Dave to acknowledge this, as it was against his interests to do so. He preferred the explanation that I really did prefer tidying up his mess left on my drawing board the night before, to studying.Dave frequently works from home himself, and does not suffer from the same compulsion to tidy up or do the shopping before settling down to work. Here, we women must take the lesson from men and assess our priorities. The problem has been overcome to some extent however now that we have an extra room which has been converted into a workroom...SR .45, April 1976  
5	WORKToday 41 per cent of all employees are women. Since the implementation of the Equal Pay Act in 1975, women’s earnings have increased from just over half men’s to under three quarters. Employers have used a combination of methods to avoid equality, from altering the job content for men and for women so their work cannot be compared, to restructuring grading systems with women below men. In doing so they called upon the well-worn myths about women’s work which stem from the sexual division of labour. A feminist exhibition about women and work reviewed in Spare Rib No. 40 showed that ‘The male jobs tend to be mobile (often involving the movement of the whole body; the women’s jobs tend to be static, fiddly and repetitious.’ Manual dexterity is called a woman’s talent. Such explanations are used to restrict the work available to women, to classify this work as women’s work and, as such, to rationalize paying women less.However, the militant action of women against the methods used to delay or prevent equal pay has scattered myths. Time and again throughout the seventies, women, often with no previous experience of organizing at work, had to strike over equal pay, and in doing so demanded a new respect for the work they do. The strikes were not always successful and often involved great hardship. And women had to fight, not only their employer, but men’s reluctance to support them, and the hostility of individual union organizers.Women who work in the public sector, whose jobs are an extension of the caring female role, have similarly shown a new militancy. The nurses’ strike in 1974 involved hundreds of women around the country, and questioned percentage pay rise which leave the lowest paid with the lowest rise. Women in both the public and private sectors have taken unprecedented action, resisting cuts by government and employers which threatened their livelihood, rebelling against the idea that women should provide a reserve pool of labour, at the same time raising issues beyond the economic. Strikes by cleaners have been concerned with health and asbestos dust. Groups of women workers brought out problems of racism, and of the particularly vulnerable position of women migrant workers in the lowest paid jobs, like hotel chambermaids and domestic workers. Shopworkers, cleaners, hotel workers and clothing workers, went on strike over the right to unionize, challenging the myth of women’s reluctance to organize. This myth conceals the way men have been unwilling to organize with women, and the way men have not understood women’s particular relation to work: the double responsibility of home and work, a consciousness of the way inflation affects food prices and eats up wage rises, problems of time and exhaustion, childcare which prevents attendance at evening union meetings, and the difficulty of women asserting themselves in the all­ male atmosphere of meetings.Other issues have been raised by the mechanism of the tribunals set up to deal with Equal Pay claims and the Sex Discrimination Act specifically. The tribunals have been difficult for women because an individual often bas to act alone, on her own initiative, which requires great determination and confidence. Some of the cases which have been lost show the threat women pose to men when they step outside the symbolic boundaries, like the women entering the male building trades, or even fishing, who have been sacked for reasons like ‘swearing’, or because they were a ‘distraction’ to the men.These instances show the immense obstacles to women entering work on the same terms as men. Yet more women spend more of their lives in paid work than ever before. Although women’s work is often structured around the needs of childcare (the number of part-time women workers increased from 29 per cent in 1968 to 35 per cent in 1976) women are often penalized for working part-time. SpareRib No. 77 reported an Appeal Tribunal’s ruling that a woman working part-time is not entitled to the same hourly rate as a man working full-time at the same job.In Spare Rib No. 51 the Press Association reported that the government felt that an ‘encouraging factor is that in the last three months most of the increase in unemployment was among women’. But most women who work need the money as well as the personal independence of earning wages. Unless there is recognition of the demands of childcare in the form of nurseries, decently paid maternity and paternity leave and the right to resume a career after an absence rearing children, women will not have equality at work. 
General MaidMINNIE COWLEYWhen Minnie Cowley retired, she wrote a detailed account of her childhood from 1910 to 1923. Her daughter Annette Kuhn, who had always been fascinated by her mother’s stories, sent an extract to Spare Rib saying: ‘I should very much like other people to have the opportunity to look at it, and I think chat there are sections which are particularly interesting as regards the history of women’s- and especially working-class women’s­ socialization, education and labour during the early years of this century. I’m sending you the section on my mother’s experiences in domestic service, which was still one of the main sectors of employment for working-class girls immediately after the First World War- although it is clear chat service was very much disliked.’ Minnie Cowley’s father was a plasterer. Her parents, with their seven children, lived in Richmond. The extract opens with Minnie, aged thirteen and unable to find a job in a shop or factory, visiting a domestic employment agency.A little way past Marble Hill and almost opposite St Stephen’s Church in Twickenham there was a domestic agency whose window was always full of ‘wanted’ cards. These were for cooks, ‘generals’, parlourmaids, housemaids, kitchen maids, butlers, companions, nursemaids and married couples, all to live in. I had often stopped to read these cards, and now I made up my mind to go there and see if they could find me a job. Making myself as respectable-looking as possible in the old mauve astrakhan coat my aunt had given me while I was still at school, a woollen tam-o’-shanter borrowed from my sister Aggie, and nice clean shoes, I set off for the agency without telling Mum what I had in mind.Feeling nervous but determined, I approached the building and with no hesitation knocked on the door; but I was in such a hurry to knock that I had not noticed the sign saying ‘Please Walk In’. My heart was thumping and butterflies were chasing each other in my tummy, but I went in and sat down on one of the hard chairs which were arranged round the walls. Before long, I heard footsteps nearing the room and a very severe-looking lady put her head round the door and said, ‘Will you come this way?’ She led me across a passage to another room.‘Good morning. Sit down,’ said the person sitting behind the desk. With its large blotting pad and wooden inkstand, the desk looked to me just like the one my headmistress used to have.‘What can I do for you?’ she asked, not looking quite so severe as the lady who had shown me into the room.‘I’m looking for a job to sleep in,’ I replied in little more than a whisper.Opening a big writing book - which I later learned was called a ledger - she proceeded to ask my name, address and age, writing them down as I told her.Then she asked me what school l had attended and where I had worked; these, she said, were for her to contact about references. She pulled a box of cards towards her, sorted them over and after some hesitation picked one out. ‘There’s something here that might suit you,’ she said, ‘I’ll telephone the lady and find out.’ She did this, and then she looked across the desk at me as I sat there dying to know what had been said, and asked if I would go and see a lady who lived near Richmond Hill and who wanted a ‘general’ to start as soon as possible. She informed me that if I took the situation I should have to pay her a fee of two shillings and sixpence. This was unexpected, but I agreed, thinking it would be worth that to get a job. By the time I left the agency, it was twelve-thirty and my appointment was for two o’clock. I had no dinner, but there was not enough time to go home.I found the road and the house I wanted quite easily, and with the time I had to spare weighed up the place in which I might be staying. It looked massive. There was a bay window on each side of the front door, more big windows on the first floor and an attic window high up in the roof. My sister had told me that servants slept either in the basement or the attic, and as there was no basement in this house, I realized that if I did get the job I should have to sleep right up there.Feeling as if I were going to my doom, I walked up to the house, lifted the fancy latch of the front gate, stepped up the tiled pathway and banged twice on the door. I did not have to wait long before the door was opened by a woman with staring blue eyes.‘Yes, what do you want?’ she said, eying me up and down.‘I’m from the agency and I have to see this lady at two o’clock,’ I said, handing her the letter I had been given.‘You should have gone round the side,’ she said, ‘that’s the servants’ entrance. But you’d better come this way now. I’ll tell madam you’re here.’ Opening the door wider, she made room for me to step into the red-carpeted hall, where just ahead of me I noticed a grandfather clock with a round pendulum swinging back and forth. The ‘Hickory, Dickory, Dock’ nursery rhyme went through my mind. I was shown into a room and told to wait there ‘while I tell the mistress you’re here’. On each side of the fireplace was a brown leather armchair studded with buttons of the same colour. The sides of the fireplace and the hearth were tiled in green, and I hoped I could make the tiles as shiny as they were at that moment. The fireplace and over mantel were white, and in the middle of the mantelpiece stood a marble clock which, with its pillars, looked like the front of a building. At each end was a small statue. How different this was to our mantelpiece at home, which was always covered with odds and ends. Having taken note of my surroundings, I was just looking at the clock again to check the time when madam came in, and right then I felt hungry and scared. The interview was not too bad, though. She asked me where I lived, what my dad worked at, how I had done at school, and where she could apply for references. This was Thursday and she wanted me to start on Saturday: she was sure, she said, that my references would be satisfactory. The household consisted of master, mistress, companion, a boy of about four years old named Peter, and the cook.I accepted gratefully, telling her I had one morning apron and a frock that could be worn in the afternoons. She offered to buy a morning frock and apron, two afternoon aprons and two caps, saying I could pay for them at two shillings and sixpence out of my wages. Maids were usually paid monthly but, like Aggie had done, I asked to be paid weekly, and here my wages were to be seven-and -six a week. I had no alternative but to agree with these terms, since Mum could not help me and Dad would not, even though he was in a position to do so: most of his money still went to the publican.It was about four-thirty when I eventually arrived home, wondering what Dad and Mum would say about my sleeping in. Almost as soon as I got in the kitchen door, Mum asked me to pick up my baby brother Harry. ‘Nurse him a little while’, she said, ‘while I finish getting your father’s tea.’ This I did very gingerly, scared that I might drop him. Mum was always saying that he was not a very strong baby and while she was to-ing and fro-ing between kitchen and scullery, I blurred out that I had got a job in service and that they wanted me to start on Saturday.‘You’d better tell your father when he comes in,’ said Mum. ‘It’s up to him.’‘Will you start off about it first, Mum?’ I asked. ‘You know what he is, especially if it’s me that wants to do something.’But it was not too difficult telling him, after all. He was in a good mood and seemed pleased with the idea, which made me feel a load had been taken off my mind. After he had gone to the pub we scrounged round all the cupboards and drawers, getting together the things I would need for the Saturday.I mended an old flannelette nightie that Aggie had left behind, raked my black alpaca frock out of the bedroom cupboard to be washed and ironed for the afternoons, and took off the vest and bloomers I had on, to be washed as well, so that I could wear clean clothes when I went and still have some left to change into.On the Saturday morning, I took a penny bus ride to Richmond Bridge and walked up the Hill. I arrived at the house earlier than arranged, and this time did the right thing by going in at the tradesmen’s entrance and knocking at the side door, which was opened by the cook.‘Come in,’ she said. ‘I’m rather busy now, but I’ll show you to your bedroom, then you can come down when you’re ready.’Through the kitchen, the hall, then up the carpeted stairs she led me, passing four doors on the first landing; then up another flight of stairs, which this time were covered with lino. There were only two doors leading off the second landing. One of these the cook opened and told me this was where I should sleep. The room next door, she added, was locked and full of things belonging to the people who owned the house. The first thing I noticed about my room was the sloping ceiling: the attic, I thought, just as Aggie had told me. I had never had so much space all to myself, and certainly nothing as posh as this.‘This must be a mistake,’ I thought. ‘Perhaps the boy will have to sleep with me.’ It didn’t seem right that this big room should be for just one person. I had to stop my gaping at all the grandness when the cook’s voice broke into my thoughts with ‘I can’t stay, you can come down as soon as you have unpacked.’ A small apron, a lacy cap and a pair of celluloid cuffs were on the bed, and so, guessing they were for me to wear, I changed my frock and put them on.Then I went downstairs. The quiet was a bit frightening, for it seemed strange after the noise and bustle I had been used to. Nearing the kitchen, I heard voices, and on opening the door saw the lady of the house talking to the cook. She introduced me properly to the cook - whose name was Beatrice - showed me round the house and then let me know the work I had to do.Once a week each room had to be turned out. There was no Hoover for the carpets: tea leaves were saved and sprinkled on them while they were damp, then swept off with a hard broom. The big windows had to be cleaned, fireplaces blackleaded and tiles washed and polished, loads of silver polished - even though some of it was never used - and the boy taken out for two hours every day. Every morning the kitchen range had to be raked out and the fire lit; then it was blackleaded, the fender cleaned with emery cloth and the hearth hearthstoned. Finally, the front step was swept and cleaned and the breakfast laid. All this was before the cook arrived at eight o’clock.Middle-class people certainly had their pound of flesh in those days. Up at six-thirty in the morning, I never got to bed much before ten at night. My time off was Wednesdays from 3 p.m. to 9.30 p.m. and on one Sunday in every month after the midday dinner. A good fifteen hours a day at the ready all the time: it was not good by present-day standards, but I still think there is something in the old saying that hard work never killed anybody. The bill for my uniform came to 15$ 11 ¾ d, a little over two weeks’ wages.2 afternoon aprons	3	11 ½ @ 1/ 11 ¾ d2 afternoon caps	2	1 ½ @ 1/ 0 ¾ d1 morning frock	6	11@ 6/ 11 dI morning apron	2	11 ¾ @ 2/ 11 ¾ dTotal:	15	11 ¾ The mistress deducted two-and-six out of my first week’s wages and asked if I would like her to send the two-and-six fee to the agency at the same time as she sent hers. Whether this was to make sure I paid it, or whether she was really doing me a good turn I never knew, but that week I drew the large amount of two shillings and sixpence for a good ninety hours, either working or at the ready.There may not have been slavery as such in those ‘Good Old Days’, but for those fourteen-year-olds who were unlucky enough to become ‘generals’ in the homes of lower-middle-class or jumped-up working­ class families, this was just about one step away from it.Sleeping alone was very frightening. I felt very lonely and would have given anything to wake up and find my sisters there with me. The smallest noise disturbed me, and I would lie awake for a long time, waiting and wondering. A climax had to come: I was so worked up and frightened when I went to bed, especially as my room was so far up. Then there was the locked room next door- my imagination ran wild about what or who might be in there. A witch? A man being kept prisoner?One night I was wakened soon after I had finally got to sleep by what sounded like a terrific explosion. Before the echo had faded away, I was out of bed and down the stairs. I dashed pell-mell into the drawing-room without even a thought of knocking and cried out hysterically, ‘The Germans are here, they’re shooting guns in the road!’ The mistress sat me on a chair and told me not to be silly, the war had been over a long time and I should go back to bed. She led me into the kitchen and gave me a cup of coffee from the pot they had finished with. I did not know it then, but coffee was the very worst thing to give to anybody for inducing sleep. It took me much longer to get back upstairs than it had done to come down them, and before getting into1 The law does not define a homosexual relationship during marriages as adultery. It is considered 'unreasonable conduct'.2 The Tenants' Association is just for the estate. The Community Association covers a whole area – five estates. Each Tenants' Association has a representative on the overall Community Association, which manages the community centre. 3 In 1970 the IRA split into two factions. The breakaway faction, the Provisionals, believe in a military solution to the present Irish crisis. The Official wing believes it should play only a defensive role militarily, while politically educating the working class. Both say they are fighting for a united socialist republic.------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Family		85Childcare		109Housework		126Work		127